I thought that the chapter “What History Is” was extremely interesting. So often people think of history as being a relatively honest record of the past but this chapter challenges that belief. Historians have different intentions, methods, goals, limitations, etc. that history becomes more than records of the past; it becomes a story of a partial story. History molds parts of the past into narratives to be added upon or even challenged. I liked when Jenkins wrote “...the question becomes not ‘what is history?’ but ‘who is history for?’” (p. 22). I agree with that statement because if for example you look at the history of the Catholic Church the perspective of a Catholic historian will differ from a Protestant historian. So a Catholic will present Catholic history as having its ups and downs but continuing to endure adversity whereas a Protestant will present it as corrupt and in great need of reformation. This does not mean that they have the past events wrong but rather it means that their interpretation of the past is different. It’s this part of history that Jenkins discussed that is challenging because I struggle in believing in relativism. Believing in relativism gives me that mindset that Jenkins describes as “hapless relativism” (p. 30). I believe that if every moment in the past could be accounted for and simply presented in an unbiased manner we would get a perfect replica of the past. The problem is I think that this is impossible. Call me a pessimist but I do not believe that we will ever get an accurate account of history. In order to achieve that we would have to have accounts of everything that has ever happened (or a time machine) and refrain from using adjectives in our writings. I do not believe that we will ever have an absolute true history but I do believe that it does exist. I do not agree with Jenkins that seeing history as relative is liberating. This is a silly example but if one guest at a wedding says that they saw the bride and groom kiss twice, someone else says they kissed four times, and another person says they kissed five times either one of them is right or all of them are wrong. Each of them believe their perception is the true account of what happened, but that does not necessitate that any one of them has a genuinely true account. I agree that what can be studied of the past is molded into what the historian wants it to be but I believe there is one true history; whether that will ever be discovered I cannot say.  
