In chapter one of the book Re-thinking History, author Keith Jenkins examines the question of what history is. Jenkins begins with what history is in theory and states that, "History is one of a series of discourses about the world". He further argues that these discourses are not responsible for creating the world we live in, but rather giving meaning to it. As a lifelong fanatic of history, this is a statement I would tend to agree with, I agree that historical context is paramount to uncovering the meanings of everything we see. 
Jenkins then goes on to explain what he sees as categorical differences between "the past" and "history". While I agree they are different terms and shouldn't be used interchangeably (although that is an incredibly difficult habit to break) I can't help but wonder what a primary source would be classified as under these stipulations. I also disagree with Jenkins when he states that "...No account can re-cover the past as it was because the past was not an account but events, situations, etc". Jenkins goes on to explain that, in this sense, that the study of "history" is actually the study of historians and their perspective. For the most part I agree with this argument but what about an event covered extensively by video and audio? I feel, perhaps incorrectly, that in such a case an event could truly be preserved to a degree in which it wouldn't simply be an account by a historian subject to interpretation but rather something more honest and steeped in truth. 
Jenkins then delves into the practice of history, the ideals, presuppositions, routines, procedures and external pressures that affect historians and impact history itself. Finally Jenkins ends with a definition of history that while wordy and requiring some explanation, I agree with.
Two lines in the chapter made a particular impression on me. First was the quote by Khlebnikov in his Decrees to the Planets, "'Look' says the historian, 'the past obeys my interpretation.'" This line was of particular importance to me because on an almost daily basis you hear someone distort the past to lend credibility to their rhetorical agenda. Second was the line, "Through hindsight, we in a way know more about the past than the people who lived in it." I've often wondered to myself, while studying particular periods in time, if the people I'm studying were at all aware not only of their place in history but of the importance of the social and political movements occurring around them. If not, we without question know more about the past than the people who lived in it, and that's thought provoking in and of itself.
