Re-Thinking History Chapter 2
	After reading chapter two “On Some Questions and Some Answers,” the subtitles on truth, being objective, bias, empathy, primary and secondary sources, cause and effect, and history being art or science. I got the impression that no matter who is writing, or even studying history, that there are two or sides of all history. There is the truth, the false, and the opinion of every event that has taken place all over the world. This chapter helps students understand and guides them to look in all directions. There is truth, but it might come at the cost of a historian being subjective and biased. The one event I come across that historians play all sides is World War II. Each historian I watch take turns on their view of what happened and how the war was fought, but when the true horror comes up about the Jewish people being killed in the death camps there is a lack of truth when they try to use empathy. The fighting and tools used are fact, but the real and raw emotion that people felt is very unclear. The bias will always be there no matter who is writing on the subject. I say that because it depends on whom the historian is writing for. If a country wants a study performed and wants the outcome to be in their favor, they will choose a historian that will write in their favor. 
	
	
	The last half of the chapter got me thing about primary and secondary sources. With all the classes I have taken over the past seven years I have learned that primary and secondary sources are a very big deal. Telling the difference between the two is something that historians must learn, but I feel secondary sources are just as good as primary sources when learning about events. As a student a secondary source tells the same cause and effect that a primary source can tell, if the historian is stating fact and not opinion. The truth is how many undergrads can get their hands on an original document from the 1500s? Yes, there are copies, but my problem is how many historians (with biased and subjective ideas) change the document into their own words. History is both art and science because it takes art to tell the story the right way and the science to prove or disprove facts. History is one giant argument that will never go away because we, as historians, will never truly understand any event that took place before our own birth and can only tell our side of any story about the past based on truth, being objective, being unbiased, trying to show empathy, using primary and secondary sources the right way, and cause and effect.
