Mr. Jenkins has a way of making the practical pursuit of history sound like this Indiana Jones-like quest for some hidden notion of capital TRUTH; but his notion of what truth is… is like the rest of history in his words, it is all interpretation and highly subjective. Whether absolute truth is achieved through philosophical argument (Plato) or if it is something that is “always created and never achieved.” My question is why does it matter? If everything else is subjective with regards to history according to Jenkins it stands to reason that different individuals will have different perceptions and definitions of the truth. In my mind this notion makes capital TRUTH itself and the pursuit of it a fallacious practice not worthy of the paper it is written on. History itself is a living and constantly evolving collection of information that human beings use to ascribe meaning to things that happened in the past. 

Humans are naturally interrogative beings…we are constantly seek to understand the world around us and how it works and why things are the way they are. This notion makes history only a small part of a very large human construct designed to give meaning to the world around us. Language (as Jenkins cites R.G. Collingwood), history, science, and all of their highly specialized subfields are tools that human beings use to give meaning to the environment and to help us understand it and make it work for us. As long as were talking about human nature it is worth noting that humans (and all other creatures I suppose) are products of a combination of environmental and experiential stimuli that create a vast multitude of ways of looking at things in the world. No two people are the same and therefore no two people are going to look at the world or any part of it the same way. We all have our unique presuppositions about things we observe. 

Jenkins argues that true empathy or “otherness” are impossible and with the aforementioned notes on human nature I have to agree. Try as we may there is really no way for humans to empathize in an objectively meaningful way with contemporary humans let alone historical characters whose environments/experiences were innumerably different from our own and likely in ways that we do not even have the social or intellectual mechanisms to understand. 

So does all of this make practicing history a frivolous exercise? To stay true to my argument I suppose I should say everyone would have different thoughts on the matter; but my opinion is that it does NOT. If anything it makes history MORE meaningful as a narrative commentary that not only attempts to explain the past and give it meaning but one that is intimately human and fascinatingly fluid.
