In this first chapter, it is pretty evident that Jenkins repeatedly tries to make the point that almost every historical account that we as readers study within the field of history is just a series of different interpretations narrated by different historians. It is important to understand that since the past is over and done with, and moments from the past can never be revisited ever again or altered in any way, it is the job of historians to use sources, both primary and secondary, to interpret, write about, and attempt to fill in the blanks about significant moments throughout the course of time. The subject of history is an extremely complicated one, as no one can ever fully interpret or process things the same way as when they first happened, and it is difficult for historians to set guidelines for how to appropriately record history without being fully subjective and still keeping their writings relative and honest. For example, two historians studying and narrating the same topic or historical event can read the exact same sources, but come to completely different conclusions about what they have read, and in turn, narrate different stories portraying their opposite perceptions. This doesn’t make either historian right or wrong about what they are writing, but proves that in the field of history, being entirely objective can be a challenge. Another issue that the subject of history continuously runs into is that no historical event can ever completely be re-interpreted or retold, because it is impossible for anyone to know every single account of the specific event or story from every possible perspective. Going back to the clear theme of interpretation, this chapter also discusses how the past is and will forever be changing, because how we as human beings interpret and recall things is dependent upon our current circumstances and opinions, which are also forever evolving and changing. The uses for history are practically boundless, but can also be hazardous depending on how certain groups with an abundance of power interpret and recount pieces of history to use to their advantage, rather than just trying to convey the truth behind someone’s story or an event. History builds upon history, and historians reinterpret the work of other historians before them to build upon their own viewpoints. Therefore, another constant problem within the field of history is knowing how to tell if a source is legitimate or not, particularly when referencing another person’s work. However, part of the fun of studying history is getting different perspectives on the same topic, and coming to your own conclusions about them.  
