Jenkins comments that truth is “always created and never found” (pg 38)  and goes on to say that truth is used by those in power and that it acts as a censor.  Although it is often the case that the powerful control what is ‘true’ and what is not, and although real objectivity is not attainable, I think that the goal of historians to find a truer representation of the past is important in itself.  Historians continue this work and innumerable different interpretations of history are created and each is seen as being ‘true’ in some sense to their authors.  From this perspective ‘truth’ is not a censor because it can mean different things to different people and they express their versions of truth in the histories they write.  It is not the idea of a ‘truth’ that censors; it is the opinion of the group in power which decides what is acceptable as historical fact.  I also found particularly interesting Jenkins’ discussion on causation and the way in which we go about answering questions of causation.  This section in particular has made me reevaluate the way I go about writing and looking at history.  Jenkins points out that explaining causality begins with choosing a method (and who can say which one is ‘correct’) and then when we evaluate causality where is the cut off? What factors are taken into account, how far do we look geographically, how far back in time? I find that these questions and that Jenkins’s idea that practicing history is like learning a craft (meaning you copy those who came before you) are particularly applicable to the level of history that I have been studying.  We are told to create an argument and to then support it using sources.  To succeed in these types of activities it is a good idea to choose one of the accepted and ‘true’ interpretations (here again the idea of what is truth) and discuss your view of it; in other words to restate what you have been told in your textbooks and lectures.  Although this is one generally accepted way of doing things there are a multitude of others which could only be considered incorrect when compared to the empirical and established methodology.  Here the concept ties back to the censorship caused by those in power, if you were to approach an essay in a way that differs completely from the view of your professor it is likely that you will not do well despite the fact that what you’ve written could be ‘true’.  
