---
layout: default
title: Enlightment History
date: 2016-11-08 00:00:00
---
# The Narrative and Dialogue of Historiography During the Enlightenment

### Abstract

The Enlightenment witnessed thinkers who used reason to critique the established structures of society. This criticism was also applied to the study of history. History of the Enlightenment cannot be understood without a fundamental understanding of philosophical concepts of the time. In this article Enlightenment thought and its effect on the study of history are examined. 

###Introduction

The enlightenment was a time of profound change in intellectual thought in the 17th and 18th centuries. The Thirty Years’ War, new scientific discoveries and the American and French Revolutions contributed to a transformation in the discourse of philosophers and historians.  During the Enlightenment history was approached more critically and with a desire to use the lessons learned to improve the human condition, this age of reason and logic is the culmination and pinnacle of human development with earlier ages represented as infancy and adolescence of humanity. In his book “Faces of History” Donald R. Kelley says “"History remained philosophy teaching by example” (Kelley, 219). This conveys the ability of history to explain about human nature, reason and virtue through past events. History could answer questions in a way that philosophy alone could not by providing real-world examples of philosophical principals. Although still revered, the importance of Roman and Greek histories declined during this time as the importance of the present ascended. The Enlightenment was believed to be the apex of human civilization. “It promoted a singular sense of the present as a moment of exceptional importance and weight in the history of the world” (Bentley, 8).

###Reason

Due to the fundamental shift in perspective and new ideas that emerged during the Enlightenment some definitions are important.  Reason, in the context of the Enlightenment, is the ability to use facts, methods and logic to gain knowledge about the world. It becomes more important in academic pursuits than imagination. “Reason is contrasted with such hypostatized internal or external rivals as imagination, experience, passion or faith” (Flew, 300). During this time reason comes to play a larger role in the study of history; "reasoned history" sought to find the underlying causes of events.  Why things happened became as much of an academic pursuit as what happened. 

###Enlightened Thought

There are some important concepts to understand when examining enlightenment thought. Humanism appeared during the Renaissance as a belief in human ability but coexisted with religious belief and faith. During the Enlightenment Humanism changed and began to reject religion and faith. Humanism places humans and the belief in human goodness and achievement as supreme to divine beliefs. In humanism, individuals are primary, and humanity is compared to the individual. "Humanity is like individual members of the species" (Kelley, 217). Philology is the examination of the language and meaning behind the language of historical documents in a critical effort to examine the authenticity and original meaning of histories.  "The study of human speech especially as the vehicle of literature and as a field of study that sheds light on cultural history." (Miriam Webster Dictionary.) Academics believed that there are rights that inherently belong to humans and are part of the human condition.  We see the culmination of these beliefs during the French Revolution in 1789 with the rhetoric of inalienable rights i.e. life, liberty, property. The belief in these rights is described as Natural Law. Hobbes and Locke are considered founders of modern political philosophy. They debated about the social contract. Hobbes was an English philosopher who is known for his work Leviathan. Hobbes wrote Two Treatise on Government.  They argued that individuals give up some freedoms and liberties to form societies and benefit from the order and protection that these societies provided. The state of nature is contrasted with civil society.

###Accsess

The Republic of Letters represents a significant shift in the access to academic discourse. The Republic of Letters was an international system of scholarship and criticism that spread the new ides through society. Scholars and philosophers sent letters, papers, and pamphlets to each other for discourse and debate on the important topics of the day. This enabled more access to the new ideas and debates of this time. Scholars could share ideas that were not easily shared in early time periods because of linguistic and geographic constraints. During the Enlightenment advances in the technologies of making books made books more accessible. The proliferation of the written word demanded categorization and organization. Samuel Johnson published his dictionary in 1755. The Johnson Dictionary became the preeminent dictionary of the next two hundred years.

###The Historians and Thinkers

A prominent vision of the thinkers and historians of this time is that of the French Philosophes, “fashionable and influential thinkers of the Enlightenment” (Flew, 267). The discourse of Enlightenment thought spread far beyond France. Through the Republic of Letters, books and resources, like dictionaries, we hear the voices of these thinkers through the past and wonder what they bought to history that was new. It is important to look at them individually for their contributions to the narrative and dialogue of historiography during the Enlightenment. 
     
###Vico     
     
Giambattista Vico was born in 1668 in Naples Italy and was a lawyer by trade. In his work, “New Science” Vico described three ages of humanity; the divine, the heroic and the human. Although he was virtually unknown during his own time, his work would be rediscovered and he would influence many historians of later ages. Vico believed that with imagination the historian allowed “the properly trained scholar to penetrate to the heart of this prehistorical darkness.” (Kelly, 234) Vico was fascinated with “the question of origins, and the pre-historical ages of myth, barbarism and a putative state of nature before civil society” (Kelley, 224). Vico, in “universal law” argues that laws are a “turning point in history” as opposed to the “feral stage of history” (Kelley). In his New Science Vico talked about the ‘conceit of nations”.  This is the belief that one’s own culture is superior and older than others and that cultural similarities are stolen. Of utmost importance to Vico is “understanding this primitive stage of civilization in all cultures” (Kelley, 224). Vico said “I make, therefor I know” (Kelley,). Vico believed that “those who make can understand in ways that mere observers cannot” (Stanford, 156) In this statement Vico is directly disagreeing with Rene Decartes. 
     
###Decartes
     
Rene Decartes was one of the most influential men of the Enlightenment. Descartes wrote “Discourse on the Method”. In it he uses a form of reasoning where any idea that contains doubt is rejected as not representing the truth. Through this method of reasoning he concludes “Cogito, ergo sum” (Decartes, 2010, 15), I think, therefor I am. Vico argues that man can know better that which he creates than that which he observes. 

###Gibbon

On a trip to Rome in 1764, Englishmen Edward Gibbon took on the challenge of writing a comprehensive history of the Roman Empire, “The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.” Gibbon sought to use the new historical paradigm of seeking the deeper meaning behind historical events to explain the “why”. He also wanted to explain the fall of the Roman empire through barbarians and “unenlightened attitudes” of the Roman Catholic church. Gibbons history of Rome is a great example of the use of philology in history. Kelley says “for Gibbon every sentence implied a judgement, every paragraph had symmetrical shape no matter how confusing or obscure the facts of the matter.” (Kelley, 231). Gibbon was criticized that his writing style “is not style in which you can tell the truth” (Kelley, 231). Gibbons used extensive notes in the text of his work. “Gibbon believed he could recreate past entire by paying attention to the known sources and discovering new ones in artifacts” (Bentley, 14). This shows the growing need in academic history of the importance and relevance of sources used. It is also a first example of citation in academic history. Gibbon also provides an example of another new introduction to history during the Enlightenment which is the inclusion of eastern histories within the context of western historical traditions.    
     
###Condorcet

Condorcet had achieved much in his career and had become the secretary of the Académie des Sciences at a young age. The French Revolution changed that and he dies in jail in 1794. He had supported the revolution in the beginning, but began to oppose it and had to hide from French authorities. While in hiding, he wrote “Sketch for an Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind.” Condorcet was influenced from a young age by his love of mathematics, he thought that history was more science than philosophy. “History is a matter of gathering and ordering facts and then showing ‘the useful truths that can be derived from connections and causality’” (Lemon, 188).  Like Vico, Condorcet saw history in three stages. “The first runs from the darkness of an unknowable primitivism up to the development of language” (Bentley, 10). The second is from the advent of language to written alphabets, and the third is from alphabets to the Enlightenment. Condorcet believed that historical knowledge is learned to improve man’s condition. History is “man’s capacity to receive knowledge through his sense-experiences, and accumulate and organize such knowledge in order to…achieve a more pleasing life” (Lemon, 188). Condorcet views these lessons from history as progress. Through this progress man challenges the status quo and seeks to gain equality from the traditional elites. “Progress occurs when intellectual innovations break down the resistance of traditional ways of doing things and changes the way people live” (Lemon, 88). We can see through this belief why Condorcet would have supported the French Revolution and how the political changes of his time may have influenced his view of history.
     
###Rousseau

Born in 1712 in Geneva, Jean-Jacque Rousseau disagreed with many of his contemporaries. Rousseau believed that the state of nature was one of happiness and equality. It was the need to form societies for protection that created inequality, materialism and unhappiness. In his “Discourse on Inequality”, Rousseau described the state of nature as “the happiest and most stable of our epochs…altogether the very best man could experience. In his discourse on the origins of inequality” (Lemon, 177). Hobbes and Locke both believed that the state of nature was one of violence and that modern societies provided equality and peace. To summarize, men formed societies as a means of protection, within these societies men developed their identities based on economic considerations, which in turn lead to the division of power and wealth. Men form civilized societies that lead to “egoism, exploitation, and insecurity for all involved, having stripped them of all independence, self-respect and genuine morality” (Lemon, 181). Rousseau believed that man created history through his decisions and was singularly responsible for its outcomes. 

###Voltaire

French historians of the Enlightenment believed that the study of history was meant to go beyond the chronical of history and seek the human spirit. Voltaire was the Nom De Plum of Francois-Marie Arouet a preeminent French writer, historian and philosopher who advocated for personal and religious freedoms. One of his most influential historical works is “Essay on the Customs and the Spirit of the Nations, published in 1756. Voltaire sought to write a universal history which gave supremacy to social history and arts and sciences rather than military campaigns.  Voltaire’s primary historical concern was with " the progress of the spirit". Although Voltaire sought to write an unbiased history he was critical of church histories and doctrines. Kelley says the Voltaire wrote history to further his own agenda. Voltaire sees the past as culmination in the perfection of the present. 

###The End

Many of the fundamentals of how history was done during the Enlightenment had not changed since the Renaissance. What did change was the use of reason to use history to think critically about society and the human condition. The Enlightenment concepts such as the social contract, inequality and humanism were used to critically examine societies, governments and religious institutions. These critiques changed thing so drastically that they are still affecting the way we do history today. 
     