---
layout: default
title: Providential History
date: 2016-11-08 00:00:00
---

# Providential History

## How Judeo-Christian historiography created a universal history with a providential plan

Judeo-Christian historiography tried to build a bridge between paganism and Christianity. They wanted to prove that history was a continuum in which God had an ultimate goal in mind. For Judeo-Christian historiography God was the God of History and this history was universal.  

### **The God of History** 

*Historical writing that held to the notion of one God being an active participant in human history became known as Judeo-Christian historiography*. It was influenced by a very ancient semi-nomadic group commonly known as *Hebrews*. The Hebrew people believed that their God (Yahweh) had delivered them out of slavery from Egypt. This act of God became the very foundation of the Hebrew identity. Every year they were required to celebrate this monumental event, the Exodus, as if it happened to them; no matter how many generations had passed.They strictly followed the tradition that was eventually depicted in the Hebrew Scriptures. This tradition can be found in [Exodus 13](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Exodus+13&version=NRSVCE) in which generation after generation, they were to explain, "This is because what the Lord did for me when I came out of Egypt"(13:8). This tradition continues to this day in the Jewish festival [Seder Passover](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Passover_Seder) Hebrews saw the [Exodus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Exodus) as being more important than the belief in Creation. *Thus the Hebrews saw their god as the God of History rather than the God of Nature* (Butterfield, 86). The *God of History* was not just the creator of the world but was also an active participant in human relations. History was being unfold while God had an ultimate goal in mind for his chosen people, the Hebrews. The notion of God working throughout their history continued to be the center of the Hebrew faith, until a Hellenistic Jew took on the task of making this Hebrew God of History a *universal God of History*.

### **Universal History: Josephus**

The man that began to create a universal history is known as [Josephus Flavius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Josephus). He was born around 37 CE in Jerusalem to a priestly family. He was a well educated Jew that became a commander in the [Great Revolt](https://www.britannica.com/event/First-Jewish-Revolt), that ultimately led to the destruction of the second Jewish temple in 70 CE. Josephus was taken as a Roman prisoner in 67 CE. While in prison, Josephus predicted that [Vespasian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vespasian) would become the next Roman Emperor. Josephus' prediction was fulfilled after Emperor Nero committed suicide in 68 CE and Vespasian became emperor in 69 CE. He remained in Rome after being released from prison and began his work as a historian in order to present Judaism favorably to the non-Jewish world. 

In one of his major works, [*Jewish Antiquities*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiquities_of_the_Jews), Josephus begins his development of a universal history. Josephus desired to create a universal history in order to make Judaism understandable to everyone including non-Jews. He begins with Creation, in which *all humankind have a common origin*. According to Josephus humankind was all united in the belief of one God and one history until the [Tower of Babel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tower_of_Babel) narrative found in the Bible. This narrative tells the story of how the whole world once spoke the same language but after angering God by trying to build a tower to the heavens, God confused their language and dispersed them throughout the world. Josephus believed that it was this moment that led to competing histories. Greeks and Romans who had forgotten this universal beginning, created their own origin stories and thus their own history. *Josephus combined the histories of other nations with biblical accounts and chronologies with the goal of creating universality* (Kelley, 79). Josephus tried to create a common origin and universal history that was later adopted and expanded upon by early Christian historians. But it’s important to first explain the reasons Christians adopted this view of history.

### **Christian Historiography**

Christianity began with the belief that a man named Jesus rose from the dead after being crucified just three days before. For Christians he was the long awaited *Messiah in Judaism*; he had come to redeem the world and proclaimed he would return again. This belief of Jesus returning a second time [parousia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second_Coming) prevented Christians from truly caring about the past. They attached themselves to the Hebrew Scriptures{hyperlinks} for two reasons. 

 1. Jesus was Jewish and the Hebrew Scriptures were an integral part to his teachings.
 2. They saw prophecies in the Hebrew texts as being fulfilled through Jesus. They used prophecies in the Hebrew Scriptures and the good news of Jesus in the Gospels to attract as many converts as possible before Jesus’ return. 

When this imminent return had yet to occur, Christians began to see the Gospels as a *historical subject and looked back to the past of their founding fathers*; the [letters of Paul](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pauline_epistles) and the [Acts of the Apostles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acts_of_the_Apostles). Their history was becoming central to them and became even more central under the rule of Constantine. Christians began to see history as a source of their identity. Christianity’s long endurance of persecution had finally reached its end when Constantine demanded religious tolerance of Christians in the [*Edict of Milan*](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Edict-of-Milan) in 312 CE. Christians, though no longer dying for their faith, still found themselves having to defend their Christian foundation. *People were accusing Christianity of only appealing to the ignorant and that it was a new innovation* (Butterfield, 177). Christianity tried to combat this through creating a history of universalism, chronology, and building a bridge with paganism.

### **Chronology: Eusebius**

The chronicler of Christianity was a man named Eusebius. There is little known about Eusebius’ early life but it is believed that he was born around 275 CE. He became bishop of Caesarea, Palaestina around 313 CE and his work *Ecclesiastical History* remains important for understanding Christian historiography. Eusebius firmly believed that the past was a *preparation* for Jesus. The past was given meaning and was fulfilled by Jesus. Eusebius attempted to show this by presenting history as a continuum by creating a *chronology* of successions. Eusebius used the succession of emperors and the philosophers of antiquity as well as apostolic succession in order to portray a universal history. *Eusebius was more concerned with the pattern of history and how it fit with universality, rather than with the detail* (Momigliano, 112). Eusebius’ history was a universal chronology with a providential plan - meaning that God was an active participant in history with an end goal in mind. For him, *God was in control of the whole fabric of history that was interconnected with human free will* (Chestnut, 60). Paganism's ignorance of this Christian God working through human relations distorted the true meaning of history; but through the incarnation of Jesus, history had been fulfilled. God’s providential plan was becoming clearer and this clarity would increase through the work of a Christian convert, who took on the task of building a bridge between paganism and Christianity.


### **The Bridge between Paganism and Christianity: Augustine**

The *builder* of this bridge was known as Augustine. Augustine was born to a Christian mother and Pagan father on November 13, 354 in Tagaste, Numidia (Souk Ahras, Algeria). Augustine was well educated and became a teacher of rhetoric in Milan in 384 CE. Augustine was a pagan until a conversion experience led him to be baptized into Christianity in 387, and eventually he became the bishop of Hippo (Annaba, Algeria) in 395 CE. Augustine connected Paganism and Christianity in his belief that pagans lacked the knowledge of God working throughout history. *He believed that it was not the pagan gods that made the Roman state successful but the one true God; wisdom was possible by believing in God* (Kelley, 91). “Therefore do not seek to understand in order to believe, but believe that you may understand” (Augustine, 6). Augustine’s most important work for his contribution to Christian historiography was the, *City of God*. Augustine wrote this in response to the fall of Rome{hyperlink} and attempts to present history in dualistic terms. The *city of man* was symbolic of unbelief and the *city of God* was symbolic of faith. *Within this work Augustine presents human history as predestined by God, with Jesus being the revelation of truth, and the Second Coming as being the end of humankind*. Augustine presents a universal history in which a belief in this *city of God* provided a true understanding of the pagan past.

**at the risk of getting too much into the actual historical/chronological content I think you need to more clearly define the "fall of Rome." If you are referring to it as a phenomenon that Augustine is responding directly to you need to difine "fall of Rome" more clearly. The "fall of Rome" was quite a long process with a LOT of significant actiuvating events attached to it...the date that is often assigned to the "fall of Rome" is 476 CE...which corresponds to the overthrow of the last "western Emperor"...and also succeeds Augustine of Hippo by nearly a century...what I'm saying is that if your claiming Augustine was writing in response to something you need to be very clear and specific about what that thing is.
I do not understand how belief in the "city of god" provides a true understanding of a pagan past...this needs some clarification.
You mention that Augustine was a pagan until a "conversion event"...you need to expand on this a it to shed some light on how it influenced him as a historian... **

### **Universal, Chronology, Providential**

Judeo-Christian historiography presented a *chronological, universal history with a providential plan*. Judeo-Christian historians chose to bring biblical narratives to life within the history of humankind. They believed humans all have a common origin and as Josephus argued, humans separated after the Tower of Babel, and invented diverse histories. Christian historians argued that the Hebrew Bible and the past of Greeks and Romans were fulfilled when God became man. *Through Jesus humans could gain full knowledge of the past*. Therefore history was a continuum in which everything was connected up to the present day of early Christian historians. Judeo-Christian historiography’s contribution of chronology and universality paved the way for future historiographies found in the Middle Ages. 


