#Historical Methods: Searching for Truth from Ancient Times to the Enlightenment

From the scrolls of ancient Greece to the jargon packed books of the modern academic historian, historians searched for “true histories”. In studying what makes up history, we must focus on some various changing themes through what we would call today historiography. Historiography focuses on these main themes that form the modern academic discipline: Source criticism, fact vs. truth, impartiality, scholarship, critical understanding, and secularism. From ancient times to the modern day, the “truth” has changed significantly, and this is part of that story of truth in historiography.  

##Classical Foundations: Rome and Greece 

###The Greeks

The ancient Greeks are seen as the fathers of history by most historians, and two Greeks in particular: Herodotus, and Thucydides laid the foundations of history for us. These two men began to look at sources in a more critical way, and differentiated between what we would call primary and secondary sources. For Herodotus, the father of history, “history depended on the one of two criteria, that is to be based on testimony that was either eyewitness (opsis) or hearsay (akoe)” (Kelly, 21). Thucydides didn’t concern himself with hearsay, and was our founder of a more political history, and this focus on political history would become a key part of historiography later. (Kelly, 29) Thucydides relied on telling the story of states in conflict, and was more critical in his telling of history than Herodotus. Also during this period, western civilization still relied on the myth-histories of Homer and other Greek poets to lay the foundations of creation in the eyes of the Greeks. So, ironically the Greeks were both critical of the events of the past, and yet relied on the myths of their ancestors to begin their stories of history. 

Finally, the core principle that the Greeks passed down was their obsession with finding truth in sources. For Herodotus and Thucydides, "They wanted to tell the "truth" as they saw it and thus to communicate something of value to their readers". (Kelly 42) These men inspired another Greek historian, Polybius, a historian who said that “to be a good historian, however, involved more than just being a good man or a good citizen, for it required that he be prepared to tell the truth at all costs, to the extent of accusing a friend or praising an enemy.” (Kelly, 33) This obsession with truth is the fundamental principle that they gave, and this principle has survived even into the modern day. 

###The Romans

To understand ancient Rome requires that a historian realize the deep sense of tradition that Romans believed in. This sense of tradition came from a great respect for the ancestors of Rome, and the *antiquarians* and jurists of Rome investigated the relics of “bygone and often forgotten ages”. (Kelly, 49) This look into origins comes with a problem, for Aulus Gellius (Roman scholar) it is regarding “the precise meaning of ancient words and their correct etymologies”.  (Kelly, 51) This is a key problem that modern historians have, and even for Romans in the “ancient” world **understanding** was an issue “for long lapse of time has rendered old words and customs obsolete”. (Kelly, 51) Without **understanding** your sources, a historian cannot do “true history” as the Roman, Sempronius Asellio, said “one should also show with what purpose and for what reason things were done”. (Kelly, 52) Even in ancient times, they knew the importance of truly **understanding** your sources and their **intentions**. 

The ancient Romans continued our journey to truth, by solidifying the belief of staying to the facts and criticizing each other, for they are Romans. Tacitus is by far one of the most trusted Roman historians, because he told “no story to excite wonder; I do but relate what I have heard and what our fathers recorded”. (Kelly, 63) This regard for reporting the facts rather than telling a story was part of Tacitus’ “sharper analytical instrument, not the byways of Herodotean cultural history but rather the Thucydidean model of mainly contemporary politico-military or “pragmatic” history”. (Kelly, 63) However more “truthful” the reporting of facts was, “none of these historians were “objective” in a modern sense; all were eager to celebrate the moral virtues which had made Rome great”. (Kelly, 65) One of those historians, Cicero, is crucial to our methodology of truth within historiography, with his two laws regarding *historical writing*. The first law states: “that an author must not dare to tell anything but the truth”. (Kelly, 66) The second law states: “that he must make bold to tell the **whole** truth”. These two laws of Cicero let to an understanding that the “standard of truth was also what distinguished history from its sister are, poetry”. (Kelly, 66) These two laws created formal historical writing, requiring (Kelly, 66):

1. Chronological arrangement
2. Geographical context
3. Consideration of the causes and consequences of actions
4. Consideration for the portrayal of actors 
5. All the above must be done in a smooth narrative

Also, according to a Roman named Quintilian, history was the third of three different forms of narrative, the other two being fiction and realism. This historical narrative, "which is an exposition of actual fact" according to Quintilian, has its formal institutional beginnings in ancient Rome. (Kelly, 67) If a historian didn't adequately have a formal structure that emphasized truth, then they were criticized by their contemporaries. Livy, a Roman historian famed for his rhetoric, was not considered true enough for Quintilian, because "Livy for instance is frequently in doubt as to what actually occurred". (Kelly, 68) In ancient Rome we have our first instance of the "practice of historical criticism and exposure of muth, usually associated with philology and pure scholarship", because of the Romans' belief in the power and role of rhetoric and truth in historical writing. (Kelly, 68) However, Truth had not yet become the center of historiograhpy, because in ancient Rome it was that "truth remained a formal requirement... but effective communication to a sophisticated readership was the dominant consideration (rhetoric)". (Kelly, 69) With the ancient Romans we have the beginning of a formal institution of truth within Historiography, and the formal requirements regarding historical writing. 

##Middle Ages: Christians and Barbarians

###The Christians

After the legalistic tradition of Rome, the role of Truth changes drastically during the Christian dominated transition period from Imperial Rome to the Middle Ages. The role of the historian also changed during this period, with their purpose being “to find the higher spiritual meaning which lay behind the letter of the human record”. (Kelly, 75) The historian Josephus who lived in Imperial Rome, considered himself to be “devoted to the truth as he was to his nation, and he “insisted on the extreme antiquity” of Israel. (Kelly, 78,79) He begins a long tradition of Christian historians relying on sheer age or “tradition” to be the foundation of deciding truth. Josephus emphasized a type of universal history that would solidify this tradition of understanding truth, by arguing:

1. The antiquity of Israel being farther back than Egypt or Babylon, and this sheer age being grounds for superiority and/or having God’s favor.
2. Josephus was an ally of truth, and he understand the world through the lens of his Jewish perspective, while denying classical tradition.
3. Due to the role of the Holy Scriptures of Israel, Josephus privileged the making and preservation of written records.

Another founding principle of Christian authors was the belief that “truth is in the word of God, which must be obeyed on the grounds of authority”. (Kelly 81) The historian Clement, believed in this principle, and he took it farther. He argued, “without the light of the Gospel, however, “Human traditions [are] intellectual nonsense”, and he believed in the “unified truth of Christianity”. (Kelly, 82) These principles pushed the classical form of truth below that of the Christian interpretation of truth, because many Christian authors believed “Christian history was the expression of a higher truth”. (Kelly, 83) This continued with the celebrated Christian historian and theologian, Augustine of Hippo, because his “conversion drew him away from the sectarian search for wisdom to the **stable** truth of the Gospel”. (Kelly, 91) Augustine justified this belief by stating that “history itself is not … among human institutions.”, and that “for events which have already occurred and cannot be undone are to be considered as part of world order, whose found and ruler is God.” (Kelly, 95) This was considered the higher spiritual meaning of history, and “secular history, is a written form of human memory, and perhaps even more fallible”. (Kelly, 95) Also, “history represents a level of reading that corresponds to human language in its grammatical sense”. (Kelly, 95) These two principles would be seen in the debate within Christianity between the letter and spirit of the law. For Christians the problem lies in the interpretation of written texts whether secular or spiritual. The interpretation of written texts eventually leads to the consensus that “the letter of the old law was the way of death, and only the spirit offered life.” (Kelly, 96) Throughout this era, repeatedly history is “occupying at once the lowest and the most fundamental level(s)”, and this low regard of history will be seen again in the later Middle Ages. (Kelly, 97) 


###The Barbarians 

The Early Middle Ages, is more important for historiography than one would think. Other than their attempts at savings manuscripts of the past, they laid the foundations of what would one day become a secular historiography. Although the origins of the states of the barbarian nations of Europe were based in myth, they were the beginnings of secular history antithetical to the universal religious history of the Catholic Church. This foundation for secular history was created by history being consider more practical and having “to do with rhetoric and liberal arts (rather) than the higher forms of knowledge such as philosophy and theology”. (Kelly, 100) This subordinate role of history may have been its’ salvation, because the Christian church wouldn’t have seen the temporal role of history as a threat to Church doctrine. For these first “secular” historians they regarded “history as a major force in the drive toward a truth that was divine as well as human”, and this truth value for these historians lied in their wanting to understand “the larger world of God’s creation”. (Kelly 101)

Also, in Europe during the Early Middle Ages we begin to see the start of a distinction between chroniclers, compilers of facts and data, and the historian, the one whom finds the meaning behind historical events.  (Kelly, 103) Chroniclers, tell us what happened; historians tell us why it happened and why it mattered. We also begin to see the beginning of the end for myth-histories near the end of this period with the criticism of the tales of King Arthur. The tales of King Arthur were made historical by Geoffrey of Monmouth, but were immediately assailed by the historians of the day, and his work was label as fiction. (Kelly, 113) This is the foundations for scholarship as we know it in the west, and historians became more critical of one another’s work. Although this scholarship still lacked a formal academic discipline, these actions by medieval historians laid the foundations of scholarship for later renaissance and enlightenment historians. The medieval age may not have been the most stable or prosperous, but its' historians aided historiography by continuing the search for truth within a religiously dominated society. 

##Rebirth: The Renaissance and Reformation

###The Renaissance

###The Reformation

##Secularism: The Enlightenment

The key event for historiography in regards to truth was the Enlightenment. The Enlightenment created a formal methodology that allowed for more impartiality and Ciceronian truth to be found in historical writings. (Kelly, 190) The key to allowing this, is the amount of source criticism that was being used by the historians of the Enlightenment. They worked to reveal forgeries of the past, consulted many authors of the past on a particular subject, and began to create a formal methodology aimed towards universals rather than particulars. (Kelly, 193) The secularization and codification of history were critical to the creation of an academic discipline that would become history.  (Kelly, 198) To codify history is to know “not only what is said, but also by whom it is said, with what words it is said, in what time, on what occasion, what precedes, and what follows”. (Kelly, 205) This codification would be critical to the methodology of history, since reliance on credible sources is essential. The secularization of history is what allowed history to finally become a real academic discipline. The removal of church influence allowed history to be more impartial and search for a truth that did contradict the teachings of the Church, because the historians’ methods gave legitimacy to their work. 

With these pillars of history being raised, we can finally get to the scholarship that makes history a true academic discipline. The Republic of Letters, a network of correspondence between scholars, as it was called, began a more comprehensive discussion between historians of different educational traditions. The Republic of Letters: “in which information and ideas were exchanged, circles, societies, and academies were formed, libraries were opened to researchers, bibliographies and encyclopedias were published, and scholars broadened their horizons directly by more or less institutionalized international voyages, the itinera italicum, and germanicum.” (Kelly, 219) This “republic” is what allowed for discussion between Italians, French, German, and British historians to begin the academic discipline. Their work towards a truer academic discipline, is what eventually led to historiography as we know it today. 

##Modern Historiography: Methods and Terms 

