Historical Universality-or histories which seek to explain why events occurred with causes that transcend local particulars-is a persistent theme in many different writings. While not all authors directly attempt to create a universal history, nor is the concept dominant in all time periods, many authors and historiographical trends can still be related to the concept.

Universal history as a discrete field is a relatively modern concept, yet the "idea" of universality can be traced further back. In mythic poetry we can see human themes which transcend the particulars, which is why Homers *Odyssey* is still pertinent today, along with other examples. As the authors of antiquity emerged on this ancient tradition, they kept many of the same themes and style as these myths. Hence, earlier Grecian authors like Herodoteus and Polybius showcase this blend between Myth and History. 

Herodoteus wrote histories which not only detailing many contemporary cultures, but also sought to explain wars and international events using trans-cultural concepts, such as Greed and Wrath. His Greecians were not superior simply by being Greecians, but for having both Freedom and Law to empower their soldiers; in this way he uses trascendent human nature to *explain* history. However Herodotus never attempted to explain a *trend* for his histories, an absence which Polybius provided.

Polybius attempted to *explain a trend* in the rise of civilized society and its "inevitable" decay. However he lacked the inclusion of cultural anecdotes which characterized Herodotus, instead focusing almost entirely on political matters. It's notable that his story contained a potential exception for Rome, which escaped political decay due to its mixed constitution. It's either a curious coincidence or a testament to his analysis that Rome fell only after abandoning its Constitution for Empire. 

Some Roman poets or authors wrote universal histories of their own, such as Lucretius with a naturalistic human origin, or Virgil (to a small degree) with his more fantastical ones. However these were all framed in Roman origin, not in universal origin, and the purpose was never more obviously to explain roman excellence. Their writings would only later-seen with Tacticus and Vico-be expanded in scope. Yet the explanations were almost always her legal system-her "Eternal laws" as recounted by Virgil-which could, of course, be brought to others.

This formed the basis of what "universality" there was to Roman history. Rome saw its story as the bringing of its superior laws and civilization to the Barbarians-at once both a very self-centered and yet universal message. Caesar couched his conquests in the "Imperial Mission" of Rome, for obvious purpose. This idea provided the *purpose and story* associated with universal history-without its larger scope. In essence, it had Polybius's trend analysis without any concern for the "larger" picture of humanity.

After the fall of Rome there began a shift in the purpose of history. As Christianity became hyper-dominant, it substituted “Theology” and “Philosophy” for “History” as a mechanism for explanation and the discovery of causes. The Christain Paradigm created a form of true universality that was divorced from historical analysis, and thus *all* histories began to *utilize* universal Christian themes, but did not truly *innovate* beyond them.

The development of this paradigm began to occur early in the Christian dominated period, and throughout the period its interpretations were concerned with Rome. The larger trend, exemplified by Augustine, related how the new history was unique because it grasped the truth of God, thus differentiating it from earlier histories. In this manner historiography, and history itself as well, was framed as the progression from Pagan mistakes to Christian Truth. Another popular interpretation in this period was the use of “Barbarians” as the “Scourge of God”, both as a literal title and more general symbol, framing them as a purifying force for the corruption of Rome; as these same Barbarians converted to Catholic Christianity, this came to dominate their own narratives as well.

By the early medieval period the origins of nation states, and thus their unique histories and interpretations, began to re-emerge as a valued field. Such authors as Jordanes, telling the Gothic story, Gregory of Tours for the Franks, and Bede for the English, all related more local perspectives that detailed pre-Christian tribes and the newer nations they became. 
However all of these histories were fundamentally Christian. The endeavor wasn’t so much to create a history of the Barbarians, but to link the history of the Barbarians to the history of Christianity; Jordanes account culminates in conversion, Gregory exemplified Christian rulers and equates conversion and success, and Bede’s very title is the ecclesiastical history of the English people. History differentiated, but only as a way of showing how Christianity has “civilized” the Barbarians. Attempts to even relate other narratives, such as seen with Geoffrey of Monmouth’s writings on Merlin and Arthur, resulted in scorn for Barbarism. 

It would take a significant amount of time and distance for this Catholic paradigm to fall. In the Renaissance we begin to see the beginnings of this. Historical authorship becomes more secular, often revering Pagan authors and dealing more with the now rapidly crystalizing nation states of Europe. History had, in some ways, changed *purpose*; authors such as Machiavelli wished to use it to compel political action, not merely relate the narrative of the civilizing and Christianizing of Barbarians. In this way history was opened to eventually explore universal themes again, as historians began to speculate as to *how and why* history was as it was, instead of merely accepting Christian theology for those answers. History began to become melded with *philosophy*, albeit only the beginnings of this can be seen. It was still limited in scope by Christianites religious dominance, but when this dominance fell history expanded to fill the gap.

The Reformation, as pertains to our narrative, is a time of diversity. The Dominion of Catholicism fell and new and varied interpretations arose. Yet the early Reformation authors simply believed they were preserving this interpretation. Authors such as Flacius Illyricus wrote on the transition of empires and held that the Reformation was merely a reconnection with the origins of Christianity, and these historical themes persevered for some time. Despite this, authors such as Bebel, who began to extort the glories of Germany and Le Caron who encouraged the development of a French identity as independent form antiquity, represented a departure from previous tradition. They no longer focused on either Roman common heritage nor Christianity to give common purpose, but began to relate the national traditions of local states. In this way, they emphasized particular causes over universal ones, and the overarching narrative of Christianity much more weakly than previous authors. In this way we see an expansion of interpretation away from universal interpretation.

However at the same time that a *singular* dominant universal interpretation fell away, the rise of the more modern *field* of universal history began. From the beginning there was a soft division between “Scientific” and “Religious” narratives. Histories such as Bishop Boussuet’s *Discourse on universal history* are very similar to past Christian narratives concerned with Rome. In contrast, Leibniz and others proposed more pseudo-scientific analogies, regarding all history as an organic “universal organism”. In Leibniz we see an attempt to use a *philosophical and scientific* approach to creating universal history; purge history of fables and you get the truth, and can then join together the particular stories into a larger narrative. 

At the same time, we see a resurgence of the analysis of empires. Vico utilized Roman authors in his analysis of historical trends, working with Tacitus and other authors. Vico attempted to blend Roman focused and divine focused narratives, mixing “profane” and “sacred” history, giving primacy to Christianity but still addressing other cultures and religions. In these authors we see attempts to **explain** specific historical events in universal themes-answering the **why** of the rise and fall of Rome, thus making that event indicative of the Rise and Fall of **Empires**.

In these examples and more we see the *emergence* of more modern histories, which focused on using a dominant paradigm to explain specific events in a larger narrative. Historians became philosophers and poets both, using history to espouse on themes previously left to such endeavors. In this way we see the traces of antiquity, yet instead of one Rome, we see several nations of note, each with its own “interpretation” of history which emphasized different universal narratives. Scotland emphasized a school of thought on the “Social Contract”, which explained the development of all civil societies with universal socialism themes. French authors emphasized the progress of history, the spread of reason and science. To a degree German histories had universal traces in their religious analysis, though they may have lacked the same goals. Regardless of the nation, many authors *individually* were not, per say, writing to explain universal history-however their work, taken *together*, does. In this we see the emergence of *fields* of history, which have undercurrents of universal causes but are interpreted to particular events.  
