
Historical Universality-or histories which seek to explain why events occurred with causes that transcend local particulars-is a persistent theme in many different writings. While not all authors directly attempt to create a universal history, the idea of creating a history with larger meaning is always addressed and discussed, in some form.

# **Ancient Narratives**

Universal history as a discrete field is a relatively modern concept, yet the "idea" of universality can be traced further back. In mythic poetry we can see human themes which transcend the particulars, which is why Homers Odyssey is still pertinent today, along with other examples. As the authors of antiquity emerged on this ancient tradition, they kept many of the same themes and style as these myths. Hence, earlier Grecian authors like Herodoteus and Polybius showcase this blend between Myth and History.

Herodoteus, writing not long after the first Peloponesian war, wrote histories which not only detailed a myriad of cultures, but also sought to explain wars and other international events using inherent human nature, such as Greed and Wrath (21). His explanations for why Greece successfully won the war involve not simply tactics of technology, but also their belief in Freedom and Law (21). Herodoteus sought to explain events as well as relate them, and in this way similarities to mythic authors can be seen. However he never created a larger narrative or trend beyond these explanations, a feature which stands in contrast to Polybius.

Polybius, writing as Rome began its period of rapid expansion and rise to power, sought not only to explain this rise but also place it within the larger trend of civilization (31). His analysis the rise and fall of Rome was one of the first of many such histories which sought to use Rome as evidence for larger historical trends. To Polybius, Rome rose due to its fear of the gods, and emphasis on a mixed constitution (34). This both explained its unparalleled expansion and provided a means which could stave off what he saw as an “inevitable” decay of civilization (33). He even provided a mechanism for this decay, building on Grecian authors and examples, which details how Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy would inevitably be corrupted (34). Only a mixture of all three could endure. It's either a curious coincidence or a testament to his analysis that Rome fell only after abandoning its Constitution for Empire.

The Romans themselves had their own view of their success. Virgil, a notable poet and writer, exemplified the self-image of Rome (55). Writing in the Early-Empire, after Rome had begun it’s imperial ambitions, Virgil stated that the Romans “keep universal rule over nations in these ways; by maintain peace by means of law, by doing justice to the lowly, by bringing down the haughty” (Mierow). Thus Rome both had the destiny and duty to take control of the known world and civilize it (33). This formed the basis of what "universality" there was to Roman history. Rome saw its story as the bringing of its superior laws and civilization to the Barbarians-at once both a very self-centered and yet universal message. Caesar himself couched his conquests in the "Imperial Mission" of Rome, for instance, showing the rhetorical influence and power of this ideal (53). The Roman Empire, as such, formed a history which could be imposed, a view of humanity *in general* which allowed Rome *in particular* dominance. 

However this very rise to Empire would later prove to be Rome’s own undoing. Such historians as Tacitus viewed the imperial administration as hopelessly corrupt (63). In his explanations of why, Tacitus framed societies as progressing from innocence, into despotism, later corrected by law, which would eventually over correct and proliferate itself into another form of despotism (63). This progression of empires, mirroring Polybius on Rome’s rise, did not seek to explain its misfortunes as merely being events, but rather inevitable *trends* in human history. 

# **Theocracy and History**

Yet as Rome fell completely its institutions and values would be destroyed, to be replaced by the Catholic Church, which waxed as Rome waned. Christianity, in this early time, needed to establish its own view of the past and its significance to the Christian story. Thus, the transitional historians during the fall of the Roman Empire needed to create a paradigm to explain Rome’s rise, conversion to Christianity, and ongoing fall.

In this period, many authors were also Christians, and often hermitic monks. The most notable was Augustine, a major figure both in historical writings and the religious thinking of the early church. The ideas of original sin and the framework of Christian redemption are sourced in him, for instance, and he is regarding as a Church Father by Catholics. More pertinently, he wrote the *City of God*, in response to hearing of the Fall of Rome from nearby North Africa. He serves as one of the major sources of historical writings and analysis regarding this highly transitional time period. His student, Orosius, further built on and clarified his writings after Augustine died during the siege of Carthage by Vandal Barbarians. These figures exemplify the blend of theocratic analysis and historical writing that dominated history and created the foundation of a paradigm which lasted for a century or more.

This paradigm related how the new history was unique because it grasped the truth of God, thus differentiating it from earlier histories (90). In this manner historiography, and history itself as well, was framed as the progression from Pagan mistakes to Christian Truth (91). Orosius further linked past events such as the pillaging of Babylon to the horrors of his time, and provided a master-narrative for the rise of Rome itself; Rome rose in order to provide the framework for the conversion of Europe to Christianity and the establishment of the will of God in law (94). 

However as Rome was replaced by the “Barbarians” who conquered her, these narratives needed to expand to encompass the “Barbarian” peoples who inherited this Christain empire. In order to do this, authors burrowed from earlier narratives of the Barbarians as a purifying force. Salvian, a Frankish contemporary of Augustine, wrote that “Barbarians are more chaste and pure than the Romans” and that “It is our vicious lives alone that have conquered us”, as early as the 300’s (105). Other authors later expanded these wonderings into more coherent narratives of the Barbarian peoples, using this narrative to explain their rise to power in a Christian framework (105).

As Christianity became hyper-dominant, it substituted “Theology” and “Philosophy” for “History” as a mechanism for explanation and the discovery of causes (100). As such Histories were generally regulated to merely chronicling and explaining particular events, and placing them inside the larger paradigm of Christian history. The Christian Paradigm created a form of true universality that was divorced from historical analysis, and thus all histories began to utilize universal Christian themes, but did not truly innovate beyond them (124-125). 

By the early medieval period the origins of nation states, and thus their unique histories and interpretations, were written as a coherent field in this tradition. Such authors as Jordanes, telling the Gothic story, Gregory of Tours for the Franks, and Bede for the English, all related more local perspectives that detailed pre-Christian tribes and the newer nations they became (106). However all of these histories were fundamentally Christian. The endeavor wasn’t so much to create a history of the Barbarians, but to link the history of the Barbarians to the history of Christianity; Jordanes account culminates in conversion (107), and Gregory exemplified Christian rulers and equates conversion and success (109). History differentiated, but only as a way of showing how Christian chronology, interpreted literally from the flood, related to the chronology and genealogy of their local subjects. Further analysis was relegated to detailing local events and religious events, as with Bede (109). Attempts to even relate divergent narratives, such as seen with Geoffrey of Monmouth’s writings on Merlin and Arthur, resulted in scorn for Barbarism (113, 123). This general trend continued, with a parade of particular names, for hundreds of years (112-118).

# **The Rise of Secularism**

It would take a significant amount of time for this Catholic paradigm to fall. In the Renaissance we begin to see the beginnings of this. Historical authorship becomes more secular, often revering Pagan authors and dealing more with the now rapidly crystalizing nation states of Europe. 

History had, in some ways, changed purpose; authors such as Machiavelli wished to use it to compel political action, not merely relate how a people fit into the Christian narrative (146). Humanism began to oppose religious narratives. As such, history began to focus more on the particular people and places of study; universalism in this period is most notable for its absence. Stories about city states (138), France (142), and Spain (156) were largely ignoring any attempts at universal narrative. This is not to say that Christianity vanished; in some places, such as Spain, authors utilized a universal Christian message or conversion to justify Spanish imperial ambitions and to explain the unknown (158). However by large Europe was rediscovering the art of creating narratives without an overt religious theme.

This would become more obvious during the Reformation, which contained significant literary and religious modifications. On the one hand, humanism and secularism became more powerful as ideologies, and economics and technology favored the creation of more literary works. The trends that began in the rennisance became more influential and powerful. Authors such as Bebel, who began to extort the glories of Germany and Le Caron who encouraged the development of a French identity as independent form antiquity, represented a departure from previous tradition. They focused on neither Roman common heritage nor Christianity to give common purpose, but began to relate the national traditions of local states. In this way, they emphasized particular causes over universal ones, and the overarching narrative of Christianity much more weakly than previous authors. 

In contrast, there was also an outpouring of new religious histories. The new Protestant churches needed to interpret their place in the past, and to do so they had to create a new History. Authors such as Flacius Illyricus wrote on the transition of empires and held that the Reformation was merely a reconnection with the origins of Christianity (171). Others, such as Jean Crespin, emphasized how Martyrdom united all peoples, giving them something to aspire too (172). 

However these writings, even as they engaged with the universal Christian narratives, became more segregated from the larger body of literature. That is not to say that there was a sudden lack of Christian influenced narratives of any denominations, and indeed Bishop Boussuet in the late 1600’s revisited and revised the narrative begun by Augustine of the fall from grace of man, emphasizing the divine providence of Rome and similar themes (212-213). However the long history of universalism being limited to Theologian Historians was truly fading, a byproduct of the expansion of humanism and, most importantly, rationalism into the larger field of history.  

# **The Philosopher Historians**

With notable last hurrahs in the persons of Boussuet and others, theology was being supplemented by philosophy. The new ideal of rationalism, building on the humanist ideal of progress, conceived of man as inevitably becoming more rational and more moral. God may factor into this discussion, and often did, but his favor was no longer some ineffable power that could be used as the default explanation for events; the world of man was logical and rational, by and large.

This is exemplified by authors such as Leibniz, a major German 

At the same time, we see a resurgence of the analysis of empires. Vico utilized Roman authors in his analysis of historical trends, working with Tacitus and other authors. Vico attempted to blend Roman focused and divine focused narratives, mixing “profane” and “sacred” history, giving primacy to Christianity but still addressing other cultures and religions. In these authors we see attempts to explain specific historical events in universal themes-answering the why of the rise and fall of Rome, thus making that event indicative of the Rise and Fall of Empires.

In these examples and more we see the emergence of more modern histories, which focused on using a dominant paradigm to explain specific events in a larger narrative. Historians became philosophers and poets both, using history to espouse on themes previously left to such endeavors. In this way we see the traces of antiquity, yet instead of one Rome, we see several nations of note, each with its own “interpretation” of history which emphasized different universal narratives. Scotland emphasized a school of thought on the “Social Contract”, which explained the development of all civil societies with universal socialism themes. French authors emphasized the progress of history, the spread of reason and science. To a degree German histories had universal traces in their religious analysis, though they may have lacked the same goals. Regardless of the nation, many authors individually were not, per say, writing to explain universal history-however their work, taken together, does. In this we see the emergence of fields of history, which have undercurrents of universal causes but are interpreted to particular events.
