Historical Universality-of the act of creating histories which seek to be applicable to all peoples-is a persistant theme in many different writings. While not all authors directly attempt to create a universal history, nor is the concept dominant in all time periods, many authors and historiographical trends can still be related to the concept.

Universal history as a discrete field is a relatively modern concept, yet the "idea" of universality can be traced further back. They were not, however, “impartial”, nor did they attempt to be so; almost all authors “choose” a culture, for which their analysis was written. They attempted to explain what made this culture “special”, 

Herodoteus wrote histories which not only detailing many contemporary cultures, but also sought to explain wars and international events using trans-cultural concepts, such as Greed and Wrath. His Greecians were not superior simply by being Greecians, but for having both Freedom and Law to empower their soldiers; in this way he uses trascendent human nature to *explain* history. However Herodotus never attempted to explain a *trend* for his histories, an absence which Polybius provided.

Polybius attempted to *explain* the rise of civilized society and its "inevitable" decay. However he lacked the inclusion of cultural anecdotes which characterized Herodotus, instead focusing almost entirely on political matters. It's notable that his story contained a potential exception for Rome, which escaped political decay due to its mixed constitution. It's either a curious coincidence or a testament to his analysis that Rome fell only *after* abandoning its Constitution for Empire. 

Some Roman poets or authors wrote universal histories of their own, such as Lucretius with a naturalistic human origin, or Virgil (to a small degree) with his more fantastical ones. However these were all framed in *Roman* origin, not in *universal* origin, and the purpose was never more obviously to explain roman excellence. Their writings would only later-seen with Tacticus and Vico-be expanded in scope. Yet the explanations were almost always her legal system-her "Eternal laws" as recounted by Virgil-which could, of course, be *brought* to others.

This formed the basis of what "universality" there was to Roman history. Rome saw its story as the bringing of its superior laws and civilization to the Barbarians-at once both a very self-centered and yet universal message. Caesar couched his conquests in the "Imperial Mission" of Rome, to obvious effect. This idea provided the *purpose* and *story* associated with universal history-without its larger scope. In essence, it had Polybius's trend analysis without any concern for the "larger" picture of humanity.

However in Rome's fall we see the emergence of a Christianity as a dominant historiographical force, which had the first truly universal histories. Medieval Christian historiography was universal in several senses. First, it was *literally* universal-the bible presented an explanation for everything that existed, and one which was presented as literal Truth in medieval history. Second, it explained all of humanity, the collective origin of all peoples. And third, it was tailored to be modular for nearly any culture, and was adapted to fit them into the overarching "plot" of the spread of (catholic) Christianity. While originally Christianity was merely the religion of previously Roman holdings, and thus this historiography was limited to that sphere, it eventually came to encompass the entirety of Western Europe and proved influential for a millennium. 

The development of this universality began to occur early in the Christian dominated period, and throughout the period its interpretations were concerned with Rome. The larger trend, exemplified by Augustine, related how the new history was unique because it grasped the truth of God, thus differentiating it from earlier histories. In this manner historiography, and history itself as well, was framed as the progression from Pagan mistakes to Christian Truth. Another popular interpretation in this period was the use of “Barbarians” as the “Scourge of God”, both as a literal title and more general symbol, framing them as a purifying force for the corruption of Rome; as these same Barbarians converted to Catholic Christianity, this came to dominate their own narratives as well.

By the early medieval period the origins of nation states, and thus their unique histories and interpretations, began to re-emerge as a valued field. Such authors as Jordanes, telling the Gothic story, Gregory of Tours for the Franks, and Bede for the English, all related more local perspectives that detailed pre-Christian tribes and the newer nations they became. 

However all of these histories were fundamentally Christian. The endeavor wasn’t so much to create a history of the Barbarians, but to *link* the history of the Barbarians to the history of Christianity; Jordanes account culminates in conversion, Gregory exemplified Christian rulers and equates conversion and success, and Bede’s very *title* is the *ecclesiastical* history of the English people. History differentiated, but only as a way of showing how Christianity has “civilized” the Barbarians. Attempts to even relate other narratives, such as seen with Geoffrey of Monmouth’s writings on Merlin and Arthur, resulted in scorn for Barbarism. 

It would take a significant amount of time and distance for this Catholic paradigm to fall. In the Renaissance we begin to see the beginnings of this. Historical authorship becomes more secular, often revering Pagan authors and dealing more with the now rapidly crystalizing nation states of Europe. History had, in some ways, changed purpose; authors such as Machiavelli wished to use it to compel political action, not merely relate the narrative of the civilizing and Christianizing of Barbarians. History began to become more particular and less universal, yet there was still the central theme of Christianity throughout these writings. Indeed, it was one of the primary tools used to assimilate the unprecedented discovery of the New World into western history. However as the Church began to lose its moral authority, and this narrative faltered further, the paradigm shattered.

The Reformation, as pertains to our narrative, is a time of diversity. The Dominion of Catholicism fell and new and varied interpretations arose. However the early Reformation authors simply believed they were preserving this interpretation. Authors such as Flacius Illyricus wrote on the transition of empires and held that the Reformation was merely a reconnection with the origins of Christianity, and these historical themes persevered for some time. However they were no longer universal. Other authors such as Bebel, who began to extort the glories of Germany, or Le Caron who encouraged the development of a French identity as independent form antiquity, represented a departure from previous tradition. They no longer focused on either Rome to his common heritage nor Christianity to give common purpose, but began to relate the national traditions of local states.

However at the same time that a dominant universal interpretation fell away, the rise of the more modern “field” of universal history began. From the beginning there was a soft division between “Scientific” and “Religious” narratives. Histories such as Bishop Boussuet’s *Discourse on universal history* are very similar to past Christian narratives concerned with Rome.  In contrast, Leibniz and others proposed more pseudo-scientific analogies, regarding all history as an organic “universal organism”. In Leibniz we see an attempt to use a philosophical and scientific approach to creating universal history; purge history of fables and you get the truth, and can then join together the particular stories into a larger narrative. Vico attempted to blend these narratives, mixing “profane” and “sacred” history, giving primacy to Christianity but still addressing other cultures and religions. Yet regardless, universal history was diversifying greatly.

It is at this point that the narrative becomes muddled and truly divergent. Each nation state of Europe had its own “interpretation” of history, which had traces of universal causes. There was a school of thought on the “Social Contract”, which explained the development of all civil societies. French authors emphasized the progress of history. To a degree German histories had universal traces in their religious analysis, though they may have lacked the same goals. Regardless, these authors *individually* are not, per say, writing to explain universal history-however their worked, taken *together*, does. In this we see the emergence of *fields* of history, which have undercurrents of universal causes but are interpreted to particular events.

Not every “School” of history, particularly in the more modern sense, is universal. Exaggerating on the trend of particular histories, there are now historical authors who devote themselves solely to encapsulating disadvantaged perspectives. However as historiography reaches the modern day, we see several schools attempt universality. Marxist interpretations, for instance, attempted to encompass all peoples as the economic struggle of “the people” against a ruling class. Other interpretations emphasized the rise of enlightened national republics as the future of mankind-which each republic might be a self-contained story, the larger narrative is still that all of humanity progressed to that goal. However analysis of present must be put off for another time. 
