Although we know that History wishes to address the larger frame of human existence, it seems that all who study or pursue history are destined to fall victim to the study of "origins". Throughout the larger framework of history presented within the Kelley text, each major civilization deals with the question of its Origins in one manner or another. This is why I believe it is one of the most keystone themes presented within the text and therefore it should be included within our "New" Historiography.
To begin as many do, I start with the Greeks. Herodotus, the so called original gangster of historical thought, though interested in many workings of the world fell victim to the endless search for "Origins". To Herodotus, origins were not simply a way to describe ones past, they were ways to venerate one’s self, as well as one’s nation. To understand ones past, is to understand one’s present self.
As you then look to the major civilization after the Greeks, the Romans though more specifically the writings of Aulus Gellius, this understanding of Origins which had preceded him seemed to be the biggest key to living in a modern world. "Live by all means according to the past, but speak in the language of the present"(51). So as you can see, even as time continues to turn, origins studies continue to stay but transform to meet the needs of the observer. It is also important to note that Rome itself tried to recreate its own origins to rewrite a new world history, the center of the universe being Rome. 
Moving past Rome, onto the Dark Ages. Rediscovered historical thought is on the rampage, as Renaissance thinkers are rethinking ways to understand the world and the workings around them. It is this time period in which we see origins take on a few different roles within society. On one hand you have active thinkers working in more of a religious sense, what i mean is that now more so than ever, to understand the workings of god is to know god. So in a religious sense it is no longer seen as a bad thing to understand god’s creations, and the way to study gods larger plan is hidden within the past histories or experiences of man. On the other hand, you have thinkers like "Petrarch" who see this study of history as a way of looking into the futures of man (131), for he sees history from more of a cause and effect standpoint to where it almost seems possible to predict future events or more so trends.
As we then skip forward to the 16th century, Origin thought had probably taken on the heaviest role to date, that of an absolutist approach to historical understanding. The scholar Giambattista Vico's approach to history is straight forward as he believes that the most original writings of history are seen It is in these examples which span the whole book, that the idea of Origins is presented. It is most important that we understand these obsessions with origins as they have clearly shaped thought, as well as events in the span of the past. As you search for the greatest truth it seems you must prior understand the past, and since you cannot simply know the past, you will forever return to Origins to try and shape understanding.
as the truest, because they were the first things or occurrence’s in history which were worthy of being written down. (224) It is in this sense that you can see the first attempt at concrete truths, for as the book has clearly stated, although under its breath, there is no real truth in the study of history. Vico is most interesting in this way as he seems to be rounding off this explanation of history and saying no there is real truth, and these "real truths" are located in the most original historical documents and writings.
