White makes note of the idea that narrative is simply a form of data but he fails to explicitly expand on this notion. So what exactly is data? Usually when we (I) think of data we think of numbers; but I had to break myself of this misconception about the definition of data for the sake of this piece. Thinking more broadly about narrative as data suggests that data is (like language, and many other things) a tool for representing ideas or phenomena. Sometimes it takes the form of language, sometimes numbers, sometimes pictures, etc. 

As White indicates, history is not a vertically linear ‘stack’ of things that happened. Chronology is but history is (as we have discussed ad nauseum) so much more than chronology. White argues that history is a horizontally linear process of impossibly complexly interwoven causes, effects, actions, reactions, interactions, and the like and chronology is overlaid onto those events to give them the aforementioned linearity. But none of that testifies to how we as historians take a hollow linear process and shape it into something consumable with tangible significance to its consumers. The tool for doing that is narrative. Narrative imposes structure on chronological sequence. 

What does any of this really mean for those consumers? Well, history as a linear sequence of events is really, really, really boring. Date…event, great. Next date…next event, great. So what? If that’s all that history ever was the discipline would have disappeared ages ago because no one would care about it. Enter stage left…narrative (and it couldn’t get here soon enough) to make the dates and events matter to people. Chronology gives us who’s and what’s but narrative gives us the why; more specifically the ‘why should I care about this?’

However just like scientists handling data White stresses the importance of “the judicious handling of evidence.” (How Thucidydean) Like data, narrative poses some significant problems, at least as far as history is concerned. Narrative always shifts and changes according to the inclinations of the narrator and White warns readers of the dangers of crossing over into the imaginary realm. This can happen intentionally or unintentionally through linguistic peculiarities, unintended consequences, malicious or politically motivated manipulation, or a whole host of other possibilities. Regardless it is something that has to be carefully negotiated for the sake of accurately representing and creating consumable and scientifically valuable history. 
