This week’s reading left me with more questions than answers about the differences between annals, chronicles, and histories. Perhaps it was because White himself seems to have more questions than answers at the end of the article? 

White’s interpretation of annals are easy enough to understand on the surface, seeing as how they appear to be the simplest form of a history. I agree with White’s assertion that events in annals appear to happen in accordance with divine will and do not need any explanation of behalf of the author because they simply are. It gets confusing when he brings in the concept of annals as a narrative - he points out that the gaps in between dates and events leaves so much story untold that the reader essentially assumes the best or the worst and makes up a mundane or catastrophic story to fill in the blanks. “For in fact every narrative, however seemingly full, is constructed on the basis of a set of events which might have been included but were left out; and this is as true of imaginary as it is of realistic narratives.” (pg. 14) And then he backtracks, and states that it is merely a list of dates and corresponding events that do not need any explanation because they are ascribed to a force or will far above that of the author. This over-then-under-reading into a list of dates and corresponding events seems pedantic, and maybe overly postmodernist or philosophical. It’s like he needed to pad out his writing about the annals so as not to seem as though he prefers the chronicle.

His characterization of chronicles seemed to split off into different directions, as well. At one point he says that chronicles concern themselves with questioning the authority of the social system and the laws of society, but then he also says that they assert their own authority to record the events taking place and to represent themselves and their interests, or society’s interests. So why exactly do they have the ability to question the authority of society, but not question their own authority to record the events of said society?

Eventually, he teases out the reason that annals and chronicles are not true narratives is because they lack a defined ending, a conclusion, a justification of the events in some sort of retrospect… but isn’t the abrupt termination of dates in the annals a type of ending? Isn’t that the whole point of his argument - that the reader is filling in the blanks in the annals or in a chronicle? Is the difference between a true narrative and a false narrative the distinction between a writer and a reader justifying the events contained within?
