Hayden White and The Value of Narrativity is about the importance of a narrative when writing history. Barthes states the narrative, **“is simply there like life itself . . . international, transhistorical, transcultural”** (White, pg. 5). This is telling future historians that the narrative is very important and is all around the world. The idea of storytelling is a key factor in telling about events in history. To tell the story the best way possible is the only way to get a full picture of the event itself. The narrative and narrator have an important job in telling the truth about events in the world. The narrative takes the facts and the individual story of many to make a whole story that can be read and understood by many cultures. To tell about an event without a beginning, middle, and end is not interesting to read and very boring. If a historian takes the narrative out of an event, it becomes all about the facts/discourse.

Writing about fact can be a good thing, but it can also be very dry. There is an upside to writing about facts/discourse, which is that being objective is possible. The other job of being an historian is to write objectively and not take a side on events. Writing the narrative could be seen as writing subjectively about events because a majority of the time historians only write about one side of the event. The process of writing discourse is just getting the facts and the important facts that, when read, a story can be made up in the mind of the reader, not one already written. White states, **“when it is a matter of events that are explicitly identified as ‘real’ rather than ‘imaginary,’ as in the case of historical representation”** (White, pg. 8)? The answer is that the **“real”** are facts that can be found in documents and the **“imaginary”** is taking the word of a person from an interview and making it real without checking the true source.

The truth is when writing history narrative and discourse go together. It is very difficult to do one without the other and so on. To tell the story is to tell the accounts of the individual and how they fit in with the facts, and just telling the facts takes the individual out of the event. On page 11 there is a list of facts that happened, but there is no narrative. Just stating that in **“714. Pippin, Mayor of the palace, died.”** The event is he died, but the question is how did he die? A narrative would be very helpful rather than just stating he died. Discourse needs a narrative, and vice versa, to tell the whole event.
