White states that the main difference between literary works and history is that history attempts to address events and people that were *“observable or perceivable”* at some point in time and writers of literature focuses on the imaginary or invented.  He asserts that without a preconceived idea about the difference between these forms of writing, then they would be indistinguishable.  White believes that this misconception about the difference between history and literature is due to the attempt to make history a science.  Facts equated to truth and therefore anything fictive was *“a hinderance to the understanding of reality.”* (pg 216).  Due to this change, history lost its creativity and imaginative elements.  This preoccupation with relating nothing but the absolute truth, the facts of what happened, through history was less than ideal for White.


White believes in linguistic determinism, that by its even beginning to describe something we are interpreting it and imposing some meaning on it that it does not intrinsically have.  Language shapes the way we structure our thoughts and our narratives, and it defines the objects that are being discussed.  For White, this means that there is no way of achieving truth or objectivity.  Therefore, the loss of the narrative elements of history does not improve history or bring it any closer to the reality of the past.  White does not see it as negative that history and fiction are closely related, rather he thinks that it is a weakness to ignore or attempt to work against the intrinsically fictive nature of history.  For White, the historians who acknowledge the bias of language, and work with this in mind, are the ones who create exemplary works, *“It is this linguistic self-consciousness which distinguishes them from their mundane counterparts and followers, who think that language can serve as a perfectly transparent medium of representation.”* (pg 224).


Because truth is unattainable and bias *(via language)* is unavoidable, historians would be better off working with these limitations than trying to avoid them by asserting to report the truth.  White seems to argue not that historians stop searching for an objective truth, but that they acknowledge the limitations of language and historical study, and use this awareness to expand and improve their work.  White states that the best historians already do this, and that their work is great because they know the limitations of history and work with, not against, literary devices and methods to somewhat balance these limitations.
