To me, until a few weeks ago, history must be a story, a narrative. I bitterly fought against Hagel, the annals and the quantitative method I have come to see some validity in their approaches. My focus on narrative, using it to assign meaning and to help make sense of the world in which we lived left me with a few questions when I began to think historically. Can words, symbols and representations, convey the importance of a past occurrence? How does one convey the message through space and time to others with whom they could not communicate? 

Hayden White speaks to the questions of narrative history in his article “The Value of Narrativity.” On page 6 White describes narrative being a ‘metacode’ through which cultures can communicate. He goes on to say “between our experience of the world and our efforts to describe that experience in language, narrative “ceaselessly substitutes meaning for the straightforward copy of the events recounted” (6). White goes on to describe the inability of historians to give a historical narrative with histories that do not fit a pattern that works for narration. Although I may be misunderstanding the meaning of this statement, for me it brings up the question if a narrative can be told without also communicating judgement, meaning, and bias. This brings me question if the schools of history which I have insulted perhaps a more honest way of telling history.  

In the beginning of the essay White describes chronicles, that they do not provide meaning in history.   “The events must be…revealed as possessing a structure, an order of meaning, which they do not possess as a mere sequence” (9). However, as his argument continues White seems to be saying that perhaps the chronicles represent reality a little more fully than they seem to. In life, there are years when nothing that we fully remember later happens, things do not start and stop in an organized fashion. Perhaps we do not know what an event “means” until long after it has happened.  Perhaps it is from a place of fear that I have wanted my history wrapped up with a little bow without the messiness, questions and confusion that is inherent in life. 

“Historical narrative without analysis is trivial, historical analysis without narration is incomplete” (10). I think this quote sums up the article best. Although I am developing much more respect for abstract form of history.
