Hayden White begins his article saying; 	“So natural is the impulse to narrate, so inevitable is the form of narrative for any report of the way things really happened, that narrativity could appear problematical only in a culture in which it was absent-absent or, as in some domains of contemporary Western intellectual and artistic culture, programmatically refuse” (5).  This is an interesting idea, and I liked him presenting it at the beginning of the article, it really set the theme for the rest of the paper.  

In this article there were many important definitions.  The two most important to this article were **narrations** and **narrativity**.  Narrations seemed to be described as a copy of the events, and objective to what was said about it.  Narrativity is more of an attempt to make a story out of the events.  White also defines three different types of historical representation of reality; **annals**, **chronicle**, and **history proper** (7).  Annals “suffer” from being a sequence of events, and have no sense of beginning, middle, or end.  Annals have no narrative structure to them as well; he uses 8th century Gaul annals as an example of this.  The chronicle, unlike annals, has a sense of narrative structure, but stops suddenly (certain time period, or the present time).  Annals and the chronicle are described as supplements to history, but not complete history by White.  I agree with this idea, only because annals can miss many important details and skip years in the records.  While some might learn best from narrativity, others prefer the straight facts; narrations, so I understand if people disagree with White’s theory.  He also disagree says history without narrative is incomplete (10).  For the same reason as the before, I agree with this statement.  While I don’t need a story to believe what I’m reading is complete history, I wouldn’t like for there to be large gaps in the data, but there are other annal-like works that give a lot of data; like *Bede’s Ecclesiastical History of England *.   History is as unique as the people that study it.  

White’s purpose in this chapter seemed to attach moral values to narrativity to an imaginary image.  I don’t know yet if narrativity imposes on objectivity or reality.  My initial opinion would be that is does impose.  Narrativity creates a story for an event, whether facts inspired the story or not.  A problem I can see with narrativity is historians forcing a story where there is none.  For example, if all we knew about the year 714 was Pippin, Mayor of the Palace, died, we shouldn’t create a story to go with it. 

White ends the article with a good question, “Could we ever narrativize *without* moralizing?” (27). I believe the answer to this is no, but I’d be interested to see why people answered yes.  

