In *The Value of Narrativity *, author Hayden White argues for the importance and the focus on inclusion of narratives in the writing of history. White explains that narrativity has experienced an ebb and flow in its inclusion in history - some historians have chosen to include it while others have completely rejected narrative. White chastises Tocqueviile, Burckhardt, Huizinga, Braudel, and other historians have rejected narrativity in many of their works, avoiding a defined arc—a clear beginning, middle or end (p6). While criticizing some historians, White praised other historians that we’ve discussed in class, such as Hegel. White suggests that Hegel’s methodology of including a story as well as including political and social content is more in line with what historians should aim for. White hypothesizes that these historians may have chosen this methodology to abstain from imposing the form and structure that are required with narrativity. White also argues for the legitimacy of narrative history, especially in relation to discourse-heavy history—claiming that the distinction lies in the “objectivity” and “subjectivity” of each. As to the “objectivity” of narrative history, White states that it “is defined by the absence of all reference to the narrator” (p7). White asserts that the true value in narrativity is its ability to connect past events to a larger story—a broader narrative. Without this connectivity, White argues that history is just a chronology and an incomplete one at that because “there is surely a plot” (p13). White also places importance on the search for the “true” or “real” stories, and that this emphasis will help guide historians towards a more objective or (dare I say) truthful history. 

Narrativity history, from a reader’s perspective, is easier to read, digest, and is more in line with the type of reading the average person encounters most often. I believe White makes a compelling case for the inclusion of narrativity in the writing of history. Not only that -- in my opinion, White successfully argues that including narrativity does not negatively impact the objectivity of the history and, in fact, even stimulates a more complete history. Because we’ve agreed that absolute truth is not possible, for historians the best course of action is to be aware of this shortcoming and simultaneously try to include everything they can in order to tell as complete a story as possible. 
