I really just need to start this out with a quote...*Every history has its myth* (220). I will admit that I was so excited to read that. Not too long after I said that I agreed with this idea of *mythistoy* in the beginning of the semester, I started to second guess myself. I was starting to think that I was **_crazy_**. But after reading this chapter I realize that maybe I was on to something.  It was exciting to think about this further in their description of there not being much of a difference between fiction and history writing. I can definitely say that I agree with this but I would be lying if I said that it wasn’t a shock to how I’ve always thought about history. From the very moment you start to learn history in elementary school it is presented as facts. Then as you age you continue to see history as a fact until you take historiography and learn that it is not so straightforward. I am finding history to be much more complex than I originally thought and I have started to criticize anything historical that I have read. In the very beginning of the chapter White says, *This characterization of historiography as a form of fiction is not likely to be received by either historians or literary critics who conventionally agree that history and fiction represent distinct forms of discourse* (215). I could not help but ask why this is such a touchy subject. Honestly I think that it is because of what we are taught history is from a young age. What White did that was *extremely interesting* was explaining that the idea of history being factional is **_new_**. 

He explains that *prior to the French Revolution, historiography was conventionally regarded as a literary art* (215). This was so *mind blowing* to me because it was something that I was never taught. History writers use creative language to paint a picture in your mind of the past just like fiction writers do of their particular subject. To me it makes sense that history could be considered a literary art. It makes me wonder *why we are so intent on presenting history as factual*. I **think** it could contribute to the fact that for whatever reason humans are just fascinated in seeing how they’ve gotten to where they are today. I mean the whole reason I like history is because everything has a history.* Everything had a beginning, progressed to what it is today, and most likely will continue progressing.* If other people are like me, then I would say that’s why we are obsessed with the past; we like to see how things were and how we’ve developed.  *What would history exactly look like if we still saw it as a literary art? Would it essentially look like postmodernism?* I’m not sure right now if I can answer that but it is something I will continue to ponder. 
