<b>Narrative</b><br><br>
I’m so happy. We’re talking about narrative. All my friends are here. Let’s get pissed. <br><br>
So, narrative is this inherent thing that humans do. We do. We tell stories about our days to our loved ones when we get home. Or our cats. Or to the people at the grocery store – that are helpless to do anything but to listen to you. It is the way that we “translate knowing into telling” (5). And of course it could be problematic. Because narrative uses language. And we all know how troublesome language can be. It’s a wonder we can even study other languages and learn them for ourselves. <br><br>
I think it is interesting that there are historians that attempt to tell a story without telling a story, or by rejecting the normal model that stories <i>usually</i> take. I mean, a story is a story, right? It doesn’t matter if I am simply reporting the things around me in a non-cohesive, stream-of-conscious way. Story is still a story. And because the language I will be using is so restricted to the social structures that are around me I am already subjective to my environment, making my story, again, still, just a story. <br><br>
What is the form of a story anyway? Anyone listen to Vonnegut’s speech on story telling? <b>But I don’t think events can just “tell themselves” (8). </b>Seems lazy. Garbage. If this were the case than history would have already been solved. But it’s not. So we tell stories about it. Seems fine. I don’t think narrative is a problem when we wish to give “<i>real</i> events the <i>form</i> of story” (9). I think the form of the story goes beyond simply telling the story. But we have to think about to consumption of the story. If we are not telling about the real event that is happening. Then real events could go on in the world unnoticed (I’m thinking holocaust). It is the story that gets people pissed. That provokes thought. No one cares that a million people died. But, here, read this story of one girls struggle. Or this story of a father that lived through it. Get pissed. Get crazy. Because these real events affected people. But to just simply tell you that they happened and they affect people isn’t enough. It isn’t enough to get the boys to go to war to stop the chaos. It’s just not enough. Books don’t get banned because they reported an account of a thing. They get banned because they provoked thought and created meaning. They get people pissed. I’m pissed. <br><br>
<b>“What would a non-narrative representation of historical reality look like?” – easy: it would look like garbage. Next question.</b><br><br>
So, do stories need closure? Does there need to be a narrative closer? I don’t think so. The past century didn’t think so. Do we want it? Sure. Sure thing. It drives us mad. But, baby, that’s not how the world spins. People die all the time. It just happens. Stars crashing into starts. It’s a shit show out there. You think the stars need closure? Doubt it. <br><br>
I think reality is inherently blind itself. There’s no need to be blaming the narrative of reality for its blindness. These lists of thing that happened are hilarious. <br><br>
<b>Day one:</b> Someone died. <br>
<b>Day two:</b> Someone killed a mule.<br>
<b>Day four:</b> Woke up hung over. Day three is a mystery. <br>
<b>Day five:</b> Over it. <br>
<b>Day:</b> Removed the numbers from the days. Numbering the days allows for too much narrative. <br>
<b>Seems fine</b><br><br>
I don’t think stories need all these things that we associate them with. Sure, we can expect certain things from stories. But that’s not really doing anything. You might as well live in your head. So these greater structures that exist in stories are infinite. Vonnegut. Anyone!? Here, watch this video: [Vonnegut's Speech](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oP3c1h8v2ZQ).<br><br>
At the end of the day it comes down to who is writing the damn thing, and who is going to read the damned thing. That’s all that really matters. And if we pick up a list (very similar to the one I provided) it has no context, no meaning, no real purpose. All we can do is guess. All we can do is guess that it was a poor history student getting pissed. But who knows; who really knows.<br><br>
You know, these blank pages are really interesting to me. Because instead of writing something that demonstrates blankness, the author left blankness (better not call him an author because that implies he told a story). This is why I respect the authors I do so much. It’s for this exact reason. They filled in these blank spaces with things that make sense. I’m thinking Updike specifically. Blah blah, all he did was write fiction, right? Sure. But he was also to demonstrate how this ordinary blank space is still a thing that is happening. And it is still a thing that we as humans have to deal with. It’s part of our experience. So, he wrote it. And he gave meaning to it. He detailed and illustrated a greater population that may have never been discussed. Blank space. I should of just left this github post blank.<br><br>
<b>Hegel</b> was a beast. Who did you vote for? Because I voted for Hegel. I think “the narrative of what actually happened” is a more fair argument to make than anything else (17). Instead of rejecting the thing completely. He harmonizes the objective and subjective cases. Making this thing. This liquid modernity thing. I don’t know. What do I know? Ask Hegel; he knew.
