  When I read the word ‘quantitative’ my mind instantly goes in the direction of statistics. The trend in the twentieth century has been for professional historians to compile tremendous collections of data about “the mass of people in the past rather than a few well-documented individuals.” In order to do this effectively and make the data more easily consumable historians have had to resort to quantitative statistical methods in order to **infer the existence of relationships** between compilations of data. The authors cite four quantitative practices for historians to use to help strain data and make meaningful, documentary rooted inferences about the past. That is: they must specifically **define the questions** they will attempt to answer and part of this is understanding the nuances of the variables involved in their questions; they must **build specifically designed analytical models** that are constructed of relevant statistical formulas capable of supporting their data. They must **produce data** that is relevant to the question at hand and then use the data as evidence to t**est the models** they have designed in order to determine the statistical significance of their inferences.

  **Statistical models by design allow investigators to parse a broader scope of data than traditional methods of historical inquiry** do. Wall’s 300-year comparative statistical analysis of household composition in England uses time-series/cross-sectional analysis; that is it analyzes data sets across a range of temporal and spatial units. Wall’s time-series data is broken into four (arbitrary by the looks of it) phases and his cross-sectional data is derived from a series of locales across England that were represented in his data. Typically analyses of this nature require large amounts of complete and easily distinguishable data points; wherein lies the challenge of applying statistical methodology to the historical record…at certain points across his time-series, his cross sectional data is incomplete and/or highly speculative. Wall makes several arguments in his narrative: rise in real wages is positively related to rise in nuptial rates; rising standard of living resulted in increased household fragmentation, for example. These arguments are relatively easy to test and then either support or refute within the context of a small geographical setting where the data exists in sufficient quantity to assign variables and test their statistical significance. But in the case of Wall's data **in a larger intercommunity or aggregate level analysis the statistical strength of these arguments deteriorates.** This is due to a lack of cultural homogeneity between samples that represent his data points.

  Wall’s analysis is a spectacular example of how to apply qualitative statistical methodology to historically significant questions but it also highlights the difficulty of applying a methodology that is **heavily dependent on numerical representation where numbers are often lacking due to incomplete historical records.**
