***“Where there is no narrative, Croce said, there is no history” (p. 10).*** 

I liked this article because for me, the *joy* of studying and writing history is being able to *narrate a story*. White states that it is a natural impulse for human beings to narrate in a way that describes how events actually happened (p. 5), and that “narrative is a metacode,” and something that is pretty universally understood across different cultures (p. 6). It seems that as always, there are issues with *objectivity*, and *subjectivity*, and always trying to distinguish between *fact* and *fiction* when it comes to telling a story. White discusses how historiography is great for considering the nature of narration and narrativity because “it is here that our desire for the imaginary, the possible, must contest with the imperatives of the real, the actual” (p. 8). For these reasons, it is easy to see the *appeal* in narrating stories, but also the *problem* with completely accepting it as the only correct way of doing history. In other words, you have to really research things before writing them down as fact.

The example that White used from the ***Annals of Saint Gall*** text justifies the importance of including narrative in historical writings, or at least it did for me. White says that the annals form of recording historical events “completely lacks a narrative component” because it consists only of different lists of events in chronological order, even though it seems to aspire to tell a story but is unable to reach the point of narration (p. 9), and it would be rather ridiculous to disagree with that. We as readers are unable to conclude several important things from reading this vague list, such as who wrote it, what caused some of the recorded events to occur, what happened after said events did occur, and perhaps the most frustrating question of all is what the heck happened in the years where nothing happened? Several years go by where the lines are completely blank. When White declares that “we moderns” look at medieval annals and are basically “put off” by their method of recording history because they failed to see that there were *important stories* that needed to be told within the events that they wrote down (p. 10), I couldn’t help but agree. How could this method of doing history satisfy anyone? It would drive me crazy writing down such vague claims without further explaining them. The medieval annals example is arguably the most frustrating I have seen so far, because as White says “it possesses none of the attributes that we normally think of as a story” (p. 11), where a story clearly needs to be told. If this method had remained the method of doing history since medieval times, I think it’s safe to say that history as a field of study wouldn’t matter or possibly even exist, because there would be no sufficient evidence from the past to research and write about. 
