The question that we have been asked to consider throughout this class is, **“who is history for?”** I definitely don’t have a definitive answer but I can say that *quantitative history* is for people that love statistics. This method of writing history interpreted trends in history using *numerical data*. This method is **_extremely_** important in examining history in a broad sense by providing statistics that can represent a large population.  *“The comparative sweep which quantitative history can afford gives historians enormous scope for raising, theorizing and answering questions that more traditional narrative history might not”* (p. 142). For me, this method is the most **scientific way of doing history**. In order to achieve quantitative history, a historian has to essentially develop a hypothesis and test it to prove or disprove the historical argument. *“While the evidence chosen by an economic historian tends to be determined in advance by the model...the validity of the model can then be tested statistically, and the strength of its predictive power measured”* (p. 143-144). The sample writing by Richard Wall was a good example of this in my opinion. He made an argument, used statistics to test it, and proved his case; *even though* I’m not sure if I exactly understood him.

Unfortunately I am *not good* with statistics so I can definitely say that this went over my head. I do feel that this method is **essential** in history. In a world where it is believed that numbers **don’t lie**, this method of history can be seen as more **concrete** than narrative history. I found it extremely hard to be critical in reading Richard Wall. I don’t know if was that I wasn’t getting it or I honestly saw the statistics as being evidence of **_truth_**. As we discussed in class, numbers can also be manipulated and therefore it can **_easily and justifiably_** be argued that numbers *_do_* lie. Richard Wall could have easily made the numbers *fit* his argument. But the thing that I liked was that he was honest when he could not provide an interpretation. *“Issues of timing apart, further problems of interpretation arise because changes in attitudes about the type of household that is considered desirable are often associated with modifications in the composition of households”* (p. 161). Both *quantitative* and *narrative history* provide diverse interpretations and assumptions, but for me quantitative history is harder to argue against. Even though quantitative history is difficult for me to follow, I feel that when it is paired up with narrative history a more **_complete_** history is made. 
