There’s a lot of “new” that isn’t really new in this chapter. Kelley asserts Renaissance historians have a new focus on glorifying the present and future, rather than simply preserving events for posterity and future generations. However, based on previous chapters it appears that this isn’t an entirely new concept, but rather, it appears that the thin veneer of impartiality is thrown to the wind. Historians now openly work in the employ of powerful political families and forces, so perhaps it is easier for us to see that their work is designed for a specific audience, unlike the works of ancient Romans and Greeks. 

This “new” focus also encompasses a shift from just saying so-and-so is wrong to a desire to prove the wrongness; Valla’s dismantling of texts from antiquity shows a novel tendency towards critical thought of forebears. Again, this shift is not so much a new approach as it is a product of the aforementioned lack of perception of impartiality. Valla and Machiavelli are now free to be critical of and partial to the actual events of history itself, rather than relegated to preserving the integrity of history in an impartial manner, or ascribing it to the machinations of a higher order.

This “new” method in the creation of history leads to a glorification of the present and the future, which Kelley argues evolves into the manifestation of a colonialist attitude towards history, and eventually the “invention” of the New World (pg. 161). But again, we’ve seen a colonialist attitude towards history all throughout history (remember the adage that history is written by the victors), albeit one somewhat veiled by the tenet that history should be impartial and events should be merely preserved in writing, free of opinion. The only real “new” thing here is the advent of the printing press and the ability to disseminate information en masse, which he spends virtually no time on. Surely access to writings previously inaccessible to most has had SOME kind of impact on the authors? On the audience? Kelley’s assertion here could have been fleshed out more fully, and he could have spent less time comparing Renaissance historians to ones from the medieval period. Perhaps we will see in future chapters just how much impact the bulk dissemination of ideas has on historiography.
