- Kelley considers the transition of history being viewed as an art to it being viewed as a science.  In particular, Kelley explores the importance of methodology in this shift of how history was viewed, *“In that age history became, literally and conceptually, a science because it was organised according to a systematic method, oriented toward universals rather than particulars, and so raised above the arts.”* (pg 193).  What makes history a science rather than an art? Is methodology the only thing separating history from the arts? Can history really be considered a science?

- Kelley discusses different forms of the *‘ideal historian.’*  For example, Bodin’s ideal historian had *“natural gifts, industry, and specially firsthand experience - civil, military, or both,”* (pg 199).  What attributes does the the ideal historian have in modern times?

- *“Even in its modern forms the tradition of universal history had little to do with discussion of historical method and criticism, distracted as it was by interest in questions of ultimate origins, general patterns, and final goals that were inseparable from religious doctrine.”* (pg 211).  Apart from religious applications, what is the utility of a universal history?  Is there any advantage in approaching history from a universal standpoint?

- There is an emerging view of the study of antiquities which considers information about the distant past untrustworthy and views it with heightened skepticism.  As one extreme example of this *“Descartes proposed to eradicate the past and memory as the primary source of error.”* (pg 204).  Do we still do take this view to some extent today?  The works of distant scholars and historians are certainly looked at through a critical lense and approached with skepticism, does this affect the value that we assign to historical works?
