From this chapter, I was able to sift through the usual overabundance of information that Kelley always insists on bringing up, and (*hopefully*) found some of the more important stuff that he was trying to get across to us as readers. 

For starters, **origins** was a big theme in this chapter. Kelley states that many writers of history throughout the centuries have basically lied about origins because of their ignorance and desire to achieve great fame *(p. 191)*. I think this is a huge thing to take into consideration when reading not just about origins, but about anything historical because it once again gives evidence to the fact that we always need to be careful of our sources, and do a significant amount of research on a topic before taking what one person or source has to say as the truth or an absolute fact.

Kelley (based upon the viewpoints of others) also gives many examples and reasons for why **history** should be considered a **science**. During the 16th century, history began attaining a scientific status because "it was organized according to a systematic method, oriented toward universal history rather than particulars, and so raised above the arts" *(p. 193)*. This is also an important part of the chapter for readers to remember and understand, because it brings up when and why people were starting to view history as a science, rather than just an art.

Of the many, many people that Kelley brings up in this chapter, I believe that **Jean Bodin** is pretty significant. For one thing, Bodin believed that history was "the very foundation of the encyclopedia of arts and sciences," and that "history was not only above the arts but also above all sciences" *(p. 197)*. Apparently, Bodin was influential because he had many followers who believed the same things he did. According to Kelley, Bodin was very concerned with chronology, and suggested that a system of universial time be somehow created *(p. 200)*, which ties back to the issue of **origins**, and why determining the origin of the world was a consistent problem *(p. 214)*.

Lastly, I picked up on the whole **historical criticism** thing that Kelley was putting down. Although historical criticism reached its peak in the 19th century *(p. 205)*, it was during the 16th century that historians began working on eliminating origin myths (*through* the discipline of historical criticism), starting with the Trojans and moving onto the Romans *(p. 202)*. This is a pretty big deal, because historians were beginning to separate **facts** from **"literary tradition"** *(p. 203)*, aka myths that had been recorded centuries beforehand. Why is this a big deal, though? Because for the very first time, literary methods were being used in the practice of historiography *(p. 203)*, thus changing the way that history was being recorded/re-recorded.

So, there you have it. Those are the topics that I found to be the most significant in this chapter, and the ones that I think we as a class should consider possibly elaborating on for our own version of this book.
