The chapter on the empiricists clearly discusses the importance of using ***only*** primary and original sources when writing anything pertaining to history. Right from the beginning, it is stated that “Empiricist historians often prefer to describe their work as a ‘craft’, with all the connotations of hands-on knowledge and skill, and to emphasize the importance of methodology over theory” (p. 1). Well, I think this is an important thing to keep in mind for all us aspiring historians, because what we do really could be seen as a craft. However, we have talked so many times over the course of this semester so far about how it is difficult to remain ***objective***, and how historians often times try to ***empathize*** with the person/group they are writing about and how it can alter the story they are trying to tell because it is impossible for anyone to actually know what really happened and how others felt or what they were thinking at the time. Ranke would argue that history “should not be judged by the historians own criteria,” and that “historians should…simply write what actually happened” (p. 2).

***Ranke*** was a big deal to the empiricists, and one of the most important legacies he left behind was ***evaluating*** and ***authenticating*** primary source materials (p. 4). When thinking about using only primary sources from the past, it is easy to see that a main advantage to that is the vast amounts of firsthand accounts to choose from. Of course, validating each one is an entirely different story. Something that this chapter realistically pointed out is that “…it remains virtually impossible for any modern historian to read all existing archival source material bearing upon their research, for the time-scale is beyond any individual” (p. 5). This kind of throws a wrench in the empiricist insistence upon using ***ONLY*** primary sources in their work. I agree that ***secondary sources*** can very easily give a subjective viewpoint about a person or situation, but they are very useful at the same time when it comes to sort of ***summarizing*** or ***condensing*** primary sources, and making them more understandable.

Finally, perhaps the most important thing that this chapter discusses is that “The same evidence can generate two quite different stories about the past, and problems arise when these are incompatible (p. 6). Of course another thing that has been brought up multiple times during our class discussions this semester is that history, in general, is almost entirely based upon ***interpretation*** and different ***perceptions***. In a sense, truth is what you make of it, and is heavily based on ***perspective***. This once again brings light to the issue of ***relativism***, and raises the question of ***absolute truth***, and if it can ever be achieved. But I honestly don’t want to go down that rabbit hole again, so I will leave it at that. 

All in all, I believe that the empiricist group of historians had some great ideas, especially when it comes to certifying primary sources and documents, and debunking the fakes. To say that historians should only use primary sources in their work is a bit extreme though, in my opinion, and seems to unnecessarily take up a lot of extra time. However, I am obviously being educated in a time where secondary sources are not only seen as useful, but are almost always a requirement when writing papers. As far as the sample reading goes, I believe that although he tried his hardest not to be subjective, Elton still could not completely break away from remaining ***100%*** objective. Through his work, he was still attempting to tell a story about someone and the events of their life (Henry VII) that happened before he had even been born, so of course he was having to ***interpret*** his sources to the best of his ability, and bring life to the characters, even though he had no way of knowing if he was portraying them in a completely accurate way.   
