I am going to be **_completely_** honest. When I read the sample of Elton’s *England Under the Tudors*, I felt like I was reading a **historical fiction** novel. In the introduction it mentions a criticism of this method of narrative history that Elton uses. *“One of the criticisms Abrams made of narrative history is the ‘luring of the reader into accepting the author’s preferred interpretation simply as a happening’” (p 10)*. I feel this is exactly what was happening when I was reading *England Under the Tudors*. I read the sample twice because the first time I found myself just accepting everything he said. It truly reminded me of a novel because when I read a fictional book I don’t **question** any of the statements, I just understand it to be true; in the context of the book of course. I believe *Harry Potter* to be true but only in his fictional setting. Elton used so much **_emotion_** to describe the historical characters. For example Elton states, *“In September 1486, Henry’s heart was gladdened by the birth of a son...”* (p 19). Okay...So how does Elton **_know_** what Henry felt when his son was born? More importantly, how do we know that he was so overjoyed that his *heart was ‘gladdened’*? I think the answer would be that neither we nor Elton know what Henry felt. The only way we could possibly know how Henry felt is if he *wrote* about it and if he did, Elton gives no indication of this. In that case I would have to **assume** that Elton made it up to emphasize his story-but then again we all know what **assume** means... :wink: Speaking of assume, Elton makes many **_assumptions_** in his *‘narrative history’*. *“Probably Henry had had his eye on the men involved for some time, and Clifford’s testimony only served to clinch matters”* (p 24). Again, **how** do we **know** that? His use of the word *‘probably’* leads me to believe that he is just making an **assumption**. I have one last thing to complain about and then I will move on. Elton does something that I *think* someone mentioned not too long ago in class. Instead of discussing a historical person and *letting the reader decide the character of that person*; Elton just states the character and thus shapes the reader’s view of that historical person. Here is a good example, *“...the duty of removing a lawless monarch like Richard II”* (p 15). He never explains why Richard II was a **_lawless_** monarch, but his statement *automatically influenced* my view of Richard. So enough of my complaining, I will discuss more substance now.

I understand that Elton was being used as an example of *empirical history* and I also understand that *empiricism* consisted of *gaining knowledge through observations of the world*. The thing that I found **_extremely_** hard to reconcile was Elton’s method and the criteria given on the core tenets of empirical history.  The second criterion that is listed, states that *the method of writing history should be, “impartial research, devoid of a priori beliefs and prejudices”* (p 3). I feel that **Elton epically failed** in following this criterion because of the emotion and assumptions that were evident in his writing. His use of emotion made it obvious who he wanted his readers to like and dislike (ie, Henry, Richard II, and Henry’s mother-in-law).  I will say something that I have said before, the **_only way_** to be unbiased in writing history would be to **refrain from using adjectives**. The whole goal of empirical history was to achieve *objective truth* and *it was believed this method could do that* (p 3). The unfortunate thing is Elton **fails to prove** that this method is successful. In order to prevent going down the *wormhole of truth*, I will just say that I feel Elton failed in proving that objective truth in history can be achieved. **Elton was an extremely entertaining and creative writer but a bias historian**. 
