Because “all historical writing is constructed upon a theory of knowledge” it remains tiresome and exhausting to attempt to write anything with <i> true </i> <b> truth </b> (1). Empiricists know this, and they define their work as “craft … over theory” (1). I think this is fair because I think one thing that we’ve learned in class is the beauty –  or chaos – that is involved with the actual <i>craft</i> of history. If anything, we are able to take that with us into the world – a new respect for history and an even deeper respect for those who do it well. Seems fine. Honestly it’s strange to me that the church has survived through so much discourse. The longevity of the church is insane but respectable. Anyway, facts facts facts (3)! Too bad Jenkins destroyed facts for us. Even though Jenkins sort of crashed our factual party, I think that the <b>“noble dream”</b> exists, sure (3). You know, the whole objective truth stuff – what actually happened. Because at the end of the day, something did happen, and I think one can write that well enough. The authors claim that one of the tasks of the historian is to legitimize or authenticate primary sources (4). While I agree that this is essential, it is easy to imagine how impossible this might be (<i>cough</i>, <i>cough</i>, wack-a-doo postmodernist theory). To be honest, all this talk about facts and legitimacy is making me scared for what people do with our histories in the future, specifically because of all the inane dribble from social media. It’s poison. Poisonous Payday bars. I practically jumped out of chair when I read that “it remains virtually impossible for any modern historian to read all existing archival source material … for the time-scale (and endurance) is beyond any one individual” (5). Seems fine. Hah, the removal of the historian from the documents is literally impossible. <br><br> This is why I think it is interesting that google tried to make a robot to summarize all of the internet, and then tweet – unfortunately, as we talked about in class, the program was trolled – so it goes. <br><br>You know, this chapter reminds of an interview with John Updike (I swear this dude is my actual favorite). Anyway, he talks about how over informed literary people are, and as a result it becomes impossible to produce anything that hasn’t been influenced by some outside narrative or discourse. This is why kids are so awesome. They are born with purged minds; we just poison them with Paydays. Seems fine. But the same is true for history, as described in this chapter – a historian should approach every work as unique entity. <br><br> I remember reading a history book about battle and the first thing the guy says is how he was never in battle. Seems 100% fine. It’s actually one of my more favorite history books. Maybe he just rhetorized my face, but I enjoyed it.
<br><br> <b>Random side note before I forget:</b> <i>this book is a thousand time better than the last one. And I think it makes a good model for what we need to be doing with Faces</i>.<br><br> It seems like historians start treating their work like law to help them legitimize their shenanigans. Popper claims that “historians … must seek to disprove [their hypothesis] through examination of the evidence” Innocent until proven guilty (8). <i> History is <b> in fact </b> the MASTER SCIENCE. </i><br><br> So, to wrap up, I think that the omniscient narrator – like we see in Elton – is absolutely effective in answering the question of obscurity of judgments and overall objective truth. The narration is really effective for a reason – because it is telling a story, and our brains love stories, we grow up with stories and they stick with us. This is a move away from the chronicle. But I think the nature of the narrator makes it very easy for someone with a personal agenda to get their point and overall manipulation of the reader across because it is easy to read. Easy to implicate. And easy to accept as the truth.
