Chapter 4 dives right into an examination of the creation of Judeo-Christian history and the change from the Herodoto-Thucydidian ways of recording history to the new "metahistorians" that sought deeper meanings in history and aimed to educate literally and spiritually. But Kelley states that, similar to the Herodoto-Thucydidean views of history, the Judeo-Christian view of history is one of two faces. The difference is one of these faces is looking to the past all the way back to its origins, and the other looking ahead to the future towards a eschatological goal. Kelley writes, "For Christians and Jews alike history was not merely deeds done, and recorded...The task of the historian was to find the higher spiritual meaning which lay behind the letter of the human record and which constituted the education of the human race." (p75). This is also echoed by Augustine who believed history had a literary significance as well as a deeper spiritual perspective as well. Kelley writes, "Thus 'history itself' was not a matter of words but, no less than nature itself, a creations of God." (p95)


I agree with Kelley's view of the Judeo-Christian approach to history, which I think is abundantly evident throughout their religious texts including the old and new testaments. I think this theory explains some of the more fantastic stories in the bible as stories seeking as well as trying to teach higher spiritual meanings and doctrinal truths and explained them through the various phenomenons in the bible. As Kelley notes, the words Truth and Wisdom appear in the bible several hundred times while the word history is not used and philosophy only once. (p81)
The only problem I see with this approach is that the mind tends to see what it wants to see, if historians are looking at history to teach a specific lesson the end result is going to be biased.  



