At the very beginning of chapter 4, on **page 75**, Kelley gives us a description of the tasks and preordained plans that Christian historians were given. It was essential for each of them to acknowledge and celebrate the origins and histories of Christianity, record the stages of progress being made within their communities as well as with their faith, attempt to explain and record the deeper spiritual meanings from past events, and educate as many people as possible through their personal works, but also through the works of others before them.

These tasks are important ones to recognize, because they allow us to have a deeper understanding of the Christian religion as it further developed, and also give us some insight as to why certain things were recorded and done the way they were at this time. Kelley seems to hint that Christian historians played a large part in changing the way that history is now written, all while Christianity was still in its early stages, and states on **page 81** that *“the story of Judaism turned national history into universal history.”* This is probably because followers of Christianity thought it vital to create and keep written records of everything they could.

A theme that I noticed pretty quickly while reading this chapter was *syncretism*. On **page 79**, Kelley states that the Jewish nation had an impulse to be universal, and sought out to incorporate the histories and beliefs of other nations into their own biblical accounts and time lines. On **page 82**, Kelley also mentions Justin Martyr and Clement of Alexandria, and how they both made it their mission to build bridges between paganism and Christianity, and on **page 85**, Kelley discusses how Prophets and apostles even drew upon ancient pagan writings, specifically for their conversant perspectives.

I believe that the idea of syncretism throughout this chapter is important to note because it could be seen as a technique used by Christians to convert pagans to Christianity. Followers of the religion believed that conversion meant gaining true wisdom, not just classical knowledge. By blending the philosophies of other religions and even incorporating the dates of important events within other religions with those of Christianity, a person converting to the Christian faith might feel more inclined to adapt to a new system of beliefs without much resistance. Since the Christian Bible, as brought up by Kelley on **page 76**, would end up serving as a historical, theological, scientific, philosophical all-in-one textbook, it needed to be written in a way that was relatable for as many people as possible, but without losing the core message of the religion. Perhaps by doing this, the Christian message was able to reach and convert many more followers than it would have been able to do otherwise. 
