It seems that this chapter was focused on a history that became **universal**. Instead of being *Greek* history or *Roman* history Judeo-Christian historiography introduced a history of all *humankind*. The development of history in Judeo-Christianity involved much more than the past of humans; it involved a higher power that was **active** in history. This development I think can be summed up as what Herbert Butterfield called, **the God of History**. It was interesting to think about the work of Josephus and how he tried to be honest but defended his belief system through his historical work. “Josephus professed to be as devoted to the truth as he was to his nation; although celebrating the venerable past of Israel, he also spent much polemical energy defending himself against contemporary Jewish accusers...” (p. 78). It seems that Josephus tended to go about history in hopes of defending Judaism. I feel that going about history in this way definitely creates the bias that Jenkins discusses. It makes it hard to know if what Josephus presented was really true or just what he *wanted to be true*. Josephus’ case is hard to affirm because he used a Jewish historical text, the **Bible**. Many events in the Bible haven’t been proven because there are very little secular documents that affirm these events.

I think that this would be the same case with the work of **Augustine** as well as the other Christian historians. They all seem to present a history where God or Jesus Christ is the so called *turning point of history*. God had been involved in history from day one and the people of antiquity knew of God blindly, but with the *incarnation* of God himself they were now on the “right” path of history. By creating this **God of History** believers had to explain the past differently. I think that Kelley sums it up well, “The story of early Christianity...centers on the question of how to make sense of the past, even if it meant imposing meaning” (p. 84). They definitely had to impose meaning because they needed to prove the existence of God. A history is being formed on the basis of a myth; this is an example of *mythistory*.  I think this also paved the way for so many different interpretations on history; it made it okay to have relativism in how history is viewed. Due to the ambiguity within history, I think it is safe to say that historians are always imposing their own meaning even if it’s unintentional. *This again makes me question how much of history can be considered a myth*.
