- The Romans seem to have begun to use history as more of a "science" rather than an "art". Some Roman historians like Livy used history to tell a story of a people, rather than trying to find a true history. The division between the story telling of Herodutus and the analytical political re-tellings of Thucydides began to take shape during this period. These "beginnings" of history in Rome gave the western world a good foundation to begin history as a practice. 

- What was truly fascinating is that so many Roman historians tried to write the story of Rome. They all began at the beginning, the founding of Rome, but all told different stories of Rome and came to different conclusions about the history of the Romans. Some told the story as myth-history, but others told this story as truly as they could while still staying in line with the myth of Rome.  The Romans no matter how objective still gave into the belief that Rome was the great bastion of civilization and should be given a tale worthy of Rome, no matter how embellished. So my question is: What would've been considered the true history of Rome?
 
 - All these historians seem to be nothing more than story-tellers, but I'm now left to wonder if that is all a historian is: A story-teller that tells the truest story of a people so they can remember the past. From the begininngs of Rome to the fall of Byzantium, Roman historians seemed to be trying two things at once: To tell the noble story of Rome and Roman virtue, and to compile the truest history of the past that they could while still beginning with Myth.
 
 - The Romans may have been the most honest historians of all: by not denying their bias towards Roman virtue, and by trying to tell history as a story, so that the meaning held within the past could be brought to the present. 
