History is far more than the preservation of dates and events. Each historian seeks to shape his present as well as the future with his interpretation of the past. The difference between “the past” and “history” is that the past records events, while history is a narrative which seeks to justify present, and modify future behavior. 

We saw this argument in Jenkins “Re-thinking history” on page 21, “re-ordering of the message to be delivered…because the needs of the dominant/subordinate are constantly being reworked in the real world as they seek to mobilize people(s) in support of their interests.”  Kelley argues in “Faces of History” that the Roman historians used their histories to persuade the audience. 

Kelly talks about this on page 52 when he quotes Sempronius Asellio. Asellio believes that there is a distinction between the past, dates and events, and history, history which, “should also show with what purpose and for what reasons things were done.” Asellio continues to compare annals and “true history”; “annals cannot in any way make men more eager to defend their country and more reluctant to do wrong.”

Throughout the chapter Kelley characterizes Roman historians as less steadfast in their search for the truth than their Greek counterparts. Kelley says that many Roman historians use creation myths in their histories. On page 49 Kelley says “Livy and his sources recount these legends without trying seriously to discredit them.” Kelley continues his argument on page 65, “Yet for all their professions of truth, none of these historians was “objective” in a modern sense. 

Kelley argues that Roman rhetorical ideals shaped the histories produced in Rome. “truth remained a formal requirement and the object of commonplace affirmations, but effective communication to a sophisticated readership was the dominant consideration.” Page 69. We can see through Kelley’s comparison of Greek and Roman historians the effects of culture on the historical narrative. Although Roman historians sought to “dare to tell anything but the truth.” Page 66, The reality was that a persuasive narrative, and a compelling was used by the Roman historians in order to persuade their audience. 

