In the introduction of Foucault’s *The Archeology of Knowledge* he describes events called “material civilization”.  He describes these events as not being studied for the same reasons politics, wars, and famines are.  They were studied for less selfish reasons and include: “the history of sea routes. The history of corn or of gold-mining, the history of drought and of irrigation, the history of crop rotation, the history of the balance achieved by the human species between hunger and abundance” (3).  Foucault also describes the change in the history of ideas, science, philosophy, literature, etc. and how they no longer have a lasting foundation.  He believes these changing foundations make old (traditional) ones irrelevant, and also any new ideas will soon become irrelevant as well.  

Foucault believes history is now becoming archeology.  He believes seeing physical objects are more educational than interpreting text.  History was starting to replace documents with artifacts.  The old history tried to find deeper (more concrete) meaning that would produce lasting results.  More modern history finds ***discontinuities*** and ***ruptures***.  Although he *seems* to favor more traditional history, Foucault admits both types of practice have opposite ways of reaching the same problem.  

History is being anything but progressive thanks to Marx, Nietzsche, and Freud ( a few examples) in Foucault’s opinion.  Marx is to blame for “founding a purely relational analysis”, Nietzche for replacing “rational foundation with moral genealogy”, and Freud for showing “we are not transparent to ourselves”(sparknotes, Intro).

In his first chapter Foucault describes one approach to history as being silent.  By this I think he means all histories have an origin that isn’t mentioned, but can be traced back to.  He also describes physical evidence as being fully illuminated.  This to me says he values the importance of physical evidence; it shines a light on the darker parts of history.  He also seems to value the silence of history; it doesn’t get as much attention, but is just as important.  

I had a hard time deciphering Foucault’s writing.  I felt he described things too much, and was repetitious.  I understand what he was trying to say, but it took me four or five tries before I got it.  His approach to history was actually very interesting, but if I didn’t have spark notes to help me I would have been lost [http://www.sparknotes.com/philosophy/arch/section1.rhtml] .  I think his concept of light and dark history is unlike anything we’ve read so far.  He has a good point to history relating to archeology, and although I don’t agree with everything he says I don’t think his points are bad (just his writing style). 
