First, let me preface this by stating that this was a particularly difficult reading for me to fully understand. And now with that caveat out of the way, my understand is that Foucault notices a trend in historical writing and understanding. This trend was encouraged by the fact that historians were becoming more self-aware of their methodologies and the problems they, as historians, encountered with limited information clouding their writing. Many of these problems stem from historians accepting universal "truths" as facts and not investigating their accuracy, as well as piecing together too many methodologies in pursuit of a more complete truth. Foucault argues that this search of a more complete truth leads to a greater potential for inaccuracies. Foucault instead advocates for historians to examine more general histories and in doing, strive for a more accurate understanding. While I, by no means, would argue that I'm smarter than Foucault or even in the same ballpark, I disagree with this sentiment and believe that historians should try and look at as many sources of information as possible but take care to adequately vet those sources. Yes, this obviously takes exponentially more time but a readers aren't in pursuit of books written the fastest, they look for books to be as historically accurate as possible. That is what I like most about Foucault is he is extremely cynical of the accuracy of sources and really strives to authenticate the legitimacy of his information. 
