When reading Elton there was a feeling of reading a story for children or young adults. He talks about Henry VII taking the crown as his own like a fairy tail. This reading is about method and how information is found. There is no real empiricism here. Elton writes like he knows everything about the rise of Henry VII. There are no clear primary sources mentioned during the reading. This is the method of knowing what you know, and only learning the specific topic.

Empiricism is defined as **“the practice of basing ideas and theories on testing and experience”** (Merriam-Webster). Elton sounds like he lived and witnessed the rise of Henry VII even though he was born centuries later. The job the historian is to tell the truth about what happened by using primary sources. I question the validity of this reading because it does not feel like the truth is being stated. This has the feeling of opinion and how Elton sees the rise of Henry VII.

Out of the three sections that are the sample reading only one **footnote** is put into place and that is on **page 17**. Elton gives dates and what happened, but nothing to back it up. We as readers just have to take his word for it that he is telling the truth and not just his opinion. For example; **“In the year 1491, a young man of seventeen, servant to a Breton merchant, was walking up and down the street of Cork”** (pg. 22). This tells us something, but how do we know that this really happened without a source or footnote.

I will say that his writing style is good and he keeps readers engaged with acting like he was there, but it is hard to believe what he is writing. That is why I referenced fairy tales above because he tells a very good story that is from his opinion.
