In theory, the empiricist approach gives a clear and unbiased representation of the facts, it describes events as they really were.  To do this historians employ rigorous source criticism, approach their studies without bias, and avoid interpretation.  However, as we know from our discussions, it is impossible to report ‘the truth’ accurately.  While the practice of history benefits from striving for the theoretical ideals of empiricism, these ideals are not attainable.  The section also discusses the importance of building from the specific and the individual to the general, and using specific evidence to support a larger claim.

Looking specifically at Elton’s *England Under the Tudors* we see that while much of his writing does strive towards the ideals of empiricism, he is unable to achieve a really unbiased and truthful narrative (the section mentions the problems with narrative as well but I’m not going to focus on that).  Elton uses specific evidence to support the larger ideas that he is trying to express.  We see an example of this in Elton’s discussion of an uprising against Henry VII, *“the rising itself was utterly insignificant, but the case deserves attention because it illustrates the Tudor principle of relying on the decisions of common-law judges, The Tudor readiness to respect the judges’ independence, and the Tudor disregard for ancient franchises and immunities.”* (pg 18).  Elton uses specific examples and details as evidence in support of these larger claims about the attitudes and policies of the Tudors, and in doing this his writing falls in line with the principles of empiricism.  He also stays true to the principles of empiricism in that, he presents several options or viewpoints when he is unsure of the truth.  *“For some reason of which we are ignorant the government had decided that his very existence constituted a danger.  Indeed, the career of Perkin Warbeck, and that of Lambert Simnel before him, gave grounds for such a belief, and if may by that diplomatic difficulties … forced Henry’s hand.”* (pg 26).  Here Elton cannot verify with sources what is true, and thus present options discussion what could have happened.

In some parts of his writing, Elton does not do the best job of pretending that he is writing without bias.  He seems rather critical of the Irish, and he often expresses his dislike in his work.  He describes the Irish in his discussion of Poynings’ laws, *“It may be noticed that when these and other acts against the lawlessness and wild violence of Irish conditions were passed, they had the approval of the English colonist element.”* (pg 29).  Here and in several other cases he describes the Irish negatively, which is clearly not an objective or unbiased view.  We have established that true objectivity is not achievable, but it doesn’t really seem like Elton is trying that hard to be objective.  He says that his descriptions didn’t come from his own interpretation ‘but because the evidence called them forth.’  However, Elton is biased and this bias shapes his narrative.  Despite his efforts, Elton doesn’t really live up to the principles that empiricism set out.
