Histories change dramatically during the reformation period.   Communities that are beginning to coalesce into states and the church both form their own narratives. During the same time the church is divided with both sides re-shaping history to bolster their claim to legitimacy.  We also see the emergence of history as a respected part of academia, “the modern study of history made its appearance and achieved professional status.” (170)
Kelley says that there is a duality between national and religious histories. Nations get their legitimacy from “supreme sovereignty derived ultimately from the Roman people.” (163) The church, on the other hand, gets its legitimacy from “divine foundations.” (163) We have seen this aspect of history before, every group constructs its history to defend and justify itself. 
What is truly unique during the reformation is the re-interpretation of religious history by the protestants to explain its split with Rome.  Different factions within the church tell their histories in such a way that legitimizes their positions in the conflict. Protestants reject all aspects of the church that derive from “tradition” or cannon law and “papal supremacy” deriving their legitimacy directly from the scriptures.  National churches used the vacuum created by this conflict which resulted in “the opening of alternative perspectives on the European past.” (165)  Protestants went so far as to hire their own historian to record Martin Luther. Protestants created a history that would enhance their position within the conflict with the church, “from the standpoint of the history of history, the Protestant Reformation represented a massive project of revisionism.” (167) Through competing narratives se see the politicization of religion. 
