The description of Braudel’s writing at the beginning of The Annales – romantic and somewhat unnecessarily focused on landforms – is relatively accurate. However, I don’t think he is solely focused on landforms so much as his writing is hampered by the sources he uses and the comparisons both his sources and he himself draws between mountain people and the land they gain their subsistence from. Like a lot of literature written by white people on the subject of non-white people, it romanticizes the idea of the noble savage. 

In one particular excerpt, Braudel relates a description of mountain-dwellers that describes them as peasants that “wear ragged cloth cloaks, their legs are wrapped in strips of material held in place with string cross-gartered; their wild eyes peer from behind disordered black hair” (pg. 105). This source is obviously pretty biased against the mountain people, right? But despite this obvious bias, Braudel – instead of dismantling the bias and wondering aloud what this source had against shaggy mountain sheepherders – includes it, then works to reframe it in light of the hostile terrain of the mountains. The mountain giveth, and the mountain taketh away, he says! She is a harsh mistress, this mountain. She has plenty of resources, but not so many that there is abundance. There is land for farming and land for grazing, but it may not be easily accessible or may only be suited for certain crops, or even need soil amendment. Mountain dwellings are spartan and rudimentary, much like mountain people. Or one of my favorites – mountain villages have none of the trappings of religion, government and civilization like the lowlands because religion, government and civilization cannot suffer the abrasiveness of mountain life. 

There’s a much more common-sense (and very well documented by Spanish Catholic missions in the New World) reason as to why religion, government, and “civilization” can’t get a foothold in the highlands like they do in the lowlands: priests and government officials don’t want to work in rural areas because their jobs are significantly harder without the existing tax/tithe base and institutional framework in larger towns and cities. And understandably, priests and government officials are trained to do their job with those networks at their disposal, so it comes as no surprise the provinces get neglected. And there’s no real reason for the government or prevailing religion to invest in rural areas by bringing in a larger population or building an institutional framework, because the lowlands are doing a bang-up job of providing those things as it is, with minimal investment or intervention.

But does Braudel mention this? Not really. I suspect he’s alluding to it at one point or another, when he mentions economics or what have you, but just come out and say it. 
