This reading focuses on everything around an event in history. This is a shift in method for historians because they start look away from the first person view and looking at data or numbers. They are using methods that talk about people, but not talking to people.

The **histoire problem** is the **“problem-solving approach to history”** (pg. 91). I feel like this is the first step in trying to not repeat history. Collecting data is import for problem solving because it gives the background information that is needed to shown on why an event started. Taking the price of bread and seeing a rise can show many different things. For example, if the price of bread in the early 20th century rises to from ten cents to five dollars, this could have been the seen as a precursor to the Great Depression. Now that data is important to history there are steps put into place to try and stop anything like the Great Depression from happening.

The **mentalities** looks at objectivity-subjectivity (pg. 92-93). The art of being objective is something all historians want to do, but always run into being subjective. To tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth is hard and not many people can do this. Personal opinion always plays a part when writing history. The question is, are Annales being objective when looking a data? Numbers do not lie, but they can be manipulated to fall in favor of the purpose. One way numbers are manipulated is when someone might taking the price off a shelf from urban areas, for example, and not looking at any other areas in the country. This gives the urban areas numbers and not the rural areas. Only a select group is picked and handed out to all.

This reading also had a fairy tail feeling, but it had footnotes for the information he was using. The reading is a little different because it talks about the mountains. The way I saw the mountains in this reading was they were in the way and going around was not an option. The mountains were the source of resources for wood, water, and many animals (pg. 103). On page 102, crops are being grown above 1,000 meters. The Romans took advantage of this during the empire. They put farmers in the mountains to grow crops and hunt. It was a good system for a long time. The people on the mountain were only looked at as the suppliers and the **“laughing stock of the superior inhabitants”** (pg. 108). This could be why they are not included in the data sets and always looked at subjectively.
