The Annales had a large impact on history, leading to a great expansion.  Incorporating social sciences into history was a driving force in achieving ***total history***.  The Annales created a multi-layered history, with an emphasis on being quantitative.

Current forms of history were also seen as ***sterile*** by **Marc Bloch** and **Lucien Febvre**.  **Bloch** and **Febvre’s**word choice, ***sterile***, seems to imply history was filtered until it fit a certain audience (or person) perfectly.  History like that couldn’t be considered true history.  This way of thinking had an impact on culture.  For example, atheism wasn’t discussed not because people were ashamed of it, but because people had to think it existed first.

This *Houses of History* chapter also spent time on the different viewpoints of history.  **Braudel** used a metaphor of history being divided into three layers of time and related to the ocean.  There were fast and slow moving parts to an ocean, just like history.  The slowest moving was related to the geographical time (that could last hundreds of years) and the fastest was related to the immediate events happening now.  **Levi –Strauss** also had a different interpretation of history.  He seemed to think humans make the world an understandable place.  We build what he calls *”mental structure”* to help us understand history.  **Kurzweil** was another historian who’s views were more similar to **Levi-Strauss’s** than **Braudel’s**.  He claimed “Structuralism is a systematic attempts to uncover deep universal mental structures as these manifest themselves in kinship and larger social structures,… and in unconscious psychological patterns that motivate human behavior”(89).

Another important topic discussed in this *House of History* chapter was the discussion of the ***mentalities***.   The ***mentalities***attempt was to relate ordinary lives to society, to make the lives of the poor relatable.  **Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie** became famous for his work; *Montaillou*.  **Ladurie** reconstructed medieval households.  He used inquisitorial records to bring medieval town’s people to life, telling us their opinions on love, sex, religion, death, and magic.  Another contributor to ***mentalities*** was **Georges Duby**.  **Duby** used medieval art and architecture to understand the lives of ordinary people.  He argued between 980 and 1420 monasteries were a place for people to turn to.  He argues he can see how urbanization and cultural expansion affected people’s attitudes towards power, money, education, and gender (92).


