This sections main point of emphasis deals with that of "Total History". As noted in this section, and also in other readings throughout the class, "Total History" is not something which is seen as achieveable for it is impossible to know a definite truth while dealing with something as vast and complicated as history. The Annales, as the title states, are those who base their historical understandings in a more universal and almost global sense. To elaborate, it can be seen throughout time, that history has primarily been used to describe the political actions of the upper class societies, becuase history clings to kings. Where Annales history makes its distinction is its ability to take into account not only political history, but also social histories of peasants, and later on the psycho-analysis of geological location.

These strides towards total history are approached in different stages. The so called first stage of Annales historiography refers to the ideas noted by Febvre, and Bloch. These two historians are seen as making the first true attempted at a total history, due to their shared beliefs that "all aspects of a society were part of historical reality(88). Febvre's analysis centralizes around the influences of geological location in reference to development of social and politcal life. Bloch on the other hand takes the original approach of understanding the ruling class and applying that to social understanding of the peasant or subordinate. In this way Bloch forms the most well rounded attempt at a total history, one that understands the ruler and the ruled to make a dinstinction about the time period.

As Annales historiography continued and evolved into the second phase it had continued this path of a "total understanding". Fernand Braudel attempts to distinguish how history evolves within society. His arguement deals with the later notion of geological influence on a society, and this influences either slowing of time or acceleration. These "durees"(89) or varying speeds of evolution are determined by geographical location, such as the alps within the Mediterranean which in this case acted upon two levels. The first level is obviously the physical presence of the mountain which encourages separation of peoples, and the second level which i find more interesting being the role this separation has on these peoples distinction within the story of history. To elaborate, not only are these people within the alps classified as being part of a larger society wether it be the Romans or somebody else, but this classification to the actual people means little as they consider themselves seaparate and distinct, so in this way the true or "total history" means something different to both sides.

The third shift "Mentalities" also deals with this separation and takes it a step further in its understanding of the social realities these peoples on both sides, hill folk and not, and their relationship to the greater human behavior of the larger group. These behaviors in this approach stem from the larger generations and feelings of those prior, who have also lived in the same circumstances of geographical and politcal locations. It is in this way that the Anneles historians become the most well rounded in their attempt at "Total History".
