The <b>Annales</b> ruined everybody’s fun. They rejected all the things. Apparently “they wanted to break down the boundaries of the human sciences” (87). The work of Febvre and Bloch promulgated an ideal of <b><i>total history</b></i>, arguing that all aspects of a society were party of historical reality” (88). Total history. Because that’s a thing. It seems like they were justifying everything with everything – if that even makes sense. Because it does, right? We’ve seen a lot of history that sort of focused, or tunnel visioned one deal, when really there all deals all over the place. Sounds like a lot of work to be fair, but I think the further we get into history (if that even makes sense) the more we see people trying to understand all of it, all of the things together. <br><br>
So, if you aren’t already troubled by truth, we have a new player entering who studied <b>time</b>. Braudel (of course he was a student of Fabvre’s) – I have a feeling this is going to be one of us soon. You know, student of a dude. – saw time in three different ways, and he “envisaged three layers of historical time” (88). Of course he used the ocean as a huge metaphor for time, but I’m not going to talk about the ocean just yet. Maybe later. The first is “the slowest moving, ‘man in his relationship to the environment’” (89). So this is basically normal time right? Like time on your watch kind of time. The time we don’t really think about – <i>unless it’s Sunday, you’ve had a few brews, and you’re reading about all these dudes who had <b>too</b> many brews and started talking nonsense. </I><br><br>
Okay, so the second time was “the middle layer comprised of economic cycles” (89). Money talks. And there’s a lot of bad hombres here. The last time “is the concern of a more traditional political and diplomatic history” (89). The author claims that Braudel’s work is similar to <b>structuralists</b>. These people cope with structures (not like buildings but mental and sociological) – people make structures, society makes structures together, and we can now understand patterns that motivate people. Seems confusing because it is – maybe we’ll talk more about it in class. Braudel had a famous phrase that goes <i>“the Mediterranean was 99 days long”</i>, but I’m not really sure what it means. Other than thinking about the sea in a different way. He kind of saw the world as one big mass I guess. Which clearly blurs time and space together. Something that Einstein is starting talk about and put numbers to (Although I’m not sure he’s mentioned in the chapter, too soon to tell). <br><br> This chapter sweeps over like 50+ years or something. But the authors did mention that these historians that were led on by Braudel were moving towards a <b>“problem solving”</b> way of history (91). I mean, we’ve sort of seen this before with the psychological dudes, but even they weren’t so focused on numbers, or things that entail <i>numbers</I>. But now we have computers. And computers solve everything for historians (but it also seems to make them very lazy like ourselves). Also, it seems like computers, to me, would be kind of poisonous. It would be easy to delete information, literally. Anyway, the Annales seem to at least try and keep up with change. Which is good and bad I guess when we are thinking about how we should do history, you know? Snip snap snip snap snip snap. It’s hard to jump ship on something you may or may not have given your whole life too. Hah, get it, jump ship – Mediterranean Sea. Easy. <br><br> So, the end of this chapter felt name droppie to me. Maybe it’s just me. But from what I understand people took Braudel’s ball and ran with it, mostly ran with it and started talking more about time and numbers. I think the most interesting part of the chapter is towards the end when the author writes “while the Annales methods have been applied very successfully to pre-industrial societies, they generally have not been [so successful in] … faster pace modern societies” (93). Which is weird. I feel like history should just work all the time. This is clearly not the case. Total history, structures, but sometimes it doesn’t always work. Seems fine.
