One of the most irritatingly obvious aspects of a Marxist approach to historical inquiry is that under this discipline historians approach historical methodology from the outlook of the “common people,” doing what E.P. Thompson describes as “history from below.” A necessary distinction needs to be highlighted when describing Marxist history, specifically Marxist history is NOT social history. That is Marxist history is not a theoretical analysis of social or political institutions but rather the relationship of the working class to the means of production that the aforementioned institutions represent and embody. The benefit of this paradigm being that the “working class” represents the great majority of the population of the (at least the Western) world. It may not be a social history but it certainly is a “people’s history.” This is annotated by the compilers of the text. Marxist history however lends a more paradigmatic theoretical credence to the “people’s history;” claiming that class struggle is the thematic backbone of the historical process.
  
It is also important to note that Marx’s writings (according to the authors of this text) are described as “political interventions” not social commentaries. Marxist historians ascribe to history as a matrix of political and economic relationships that boil down to what Marx identified as historical materialism. Marx and those who subscribe to his school of thought identify the central dynamic of human history as the constant struggle for human beings to meet material and psychological needs that are perpetually out of reach (by design in a capitalist economic system.) For Marx this inaccessibility of a working class person’s material and psychological needs led  to what he described as an inevitable and violent political revolution.

E.P. Thompson, I believe embodies the very core of Marxist historical ideology. His discussion revolves around the issues and struggles of the working class but he also champions the historical primacy of the working class. Thompson claims that the working class’s rise is as inevitable as Marx’s violent revolution. He argues that the “working class created itself as much as it was created” and that the creation of class consciousness was another inevitable phenomenon that was a by-product of capitalism (that was itself a by-product of industrialization). Thompson also makes the point that industrialization and its class based segregation of society let to more “intensive and transparent forms of economic exploitation.”

For many, (including me) Marx’s writings and those of his acolytes are dark and painful analyses of the human condition as a result of the industrial revolution; they are filled with words like catastrophe, revolution, drama, exploitation, and oppression and people are typically referred to in terms of their relationship to their means of economic production. Compared to the writing of Elton in which “common people” are usually referred to in terms of their relationship to some noble (the Duke of wherever), Thompson’s writing (channeling Marx in frightening detail) is tangibly and cyclically apocalyptic. The redemption for this school of thought (for me anyway) lies in that it holds value for the industrially gentrified masses as a narrative of their struggle to subsist in the world rather that the grandiose saga of players that influence the direction of national narratives on the backs of those Marxist working people.
