Marxism is ultimately derivative of the earlier empiricist model in many subtle ways. First, Marxism is derived from a *rejection of conventional authority*-something which Empiricists, for better or worse, represented in the historical field. The example given of empiricist writings appears to showcase this; it emphasizes authority, legitimate succession, and similar causes behind the English succession crisis. Yet at the same time, Marxists rely on the same techniques and methodologies that empiricists utilized, as the Marxist writing shows trappings of primary sources, and only a subset of marxism rejects this trapping entirely (40, last pargraph).

This conception of Marxism as a derivative semi-rejection of empiricism is particularly robust when viewing the "larger picture". Namely, Marxism *forms one*. Empiricism emphasizes facts, particulars, and was a rejection of the philosophical *universal* histories. Marxism is almost explicitly a **return** to this form of writing history. Marxism thought could and was applied to all societies, constructing a **master narrative** of the progression of **economic epochs** which was then applied in particular. As such, it is perhaps one of the most enduring *universal narratives* in historical literature. This focus on a singular narrative is a fundemental rejection of empiricism.

However more fundementally, Marxism rejects the typical Empiricism writer due to its focus on *economics in general*. Empiricists seem, based on the reading given and some hints in the text, to focus on political causes for events. Marxists focus on the socio-economic causes, viewing these as a more complete **master cause** than other methods. 

However in many ways, Marxism can be rejected for the same reasons Empiricism arose. The philosophical histories of the Enlightenment only "make sense" if one agrees with their conclusions. The history of positive progress of the Enlightnment seems hollow when applied to many of the colonial domains. Likewise, a Marxist expression of progressive economic epochs seems hollow when one talks about the Khmer Rouge. In the same way that one can claim that many philosopgical histories existed merely to justify the power of the colonial european empires, Marxism became a justification for the expansionist power of the Soviet Union in the 20th century. Thus, its subjective nature can make the entire school seem hollow and pointless.

Likewise, Marxist histories lack explanations for certain historical events. One would be hard-pressed to come up with an explanation as to why the American civil war occurred with an entirely economic perspective; while economic causes and resentment of the south against the north has some validity, the obsession with states rights cannot be solely traced to economic causes and appears to emerge separately as a political force. The focus on the means of production and economic causes does not always seem to bear weight, and if *true* is only *true* in an abstract and distant sense, casually, from the events being discussed. As such, the viewpoint is ultimately incomplete.

Despite this, even when it *is* incomplete, it still has an interesting perspective. Viewing the economic context of the civil war does provide insight into the causes and political background of the war. Additionally, Marxism has another facet as the history of the opressed; this particular viewpoint provides significant insight into the lives of slaves during the time period, or how factory workers responded to the demands of wartime economics. It's particular focus yet universal message still bears listening to, even if it never completely explains the "why" of history. At the very least, as oppossed to extreme empiricism, it at least *tries* to provide a narrative.

It seems that authors of "marxism" histories are, however, cognizant of these flaws. While they undoubtably write in the marxism super-paradigm of classes, they do not seem to adhere strictly to talking of purely material causes. E.P. Thompson, as an example, explains that political facets are still important, despite using the economics to derive meaning in regards to social class (50). In this way Marxist historians still dealt with the topics of Marx, yet expanded on his original thesis.
