**Karl Marx** was an influential theorist of the twentieth century.  He was born in 1818 in Trier, Germany.  He mostly wrote about political interventions coming from the working class, and revolutionary democratic movements.  His interpretation of human history, “historical materialism”, shared the same basic principles developed in the *German Ideology*.  **“Historical materialism”** describes the struggle between balancing material and psychological needs; “life involves before everything else eating and drinking, a habitation, clothing and many other things” (34).  Marx also argues that none of these needs can ever be fully completed, because satisfying one need leads to more needs.

Marx relates the history of humanity to the history of change.  He does this by comparing human history to **economic structure**.  Economic structure served as the foundation of a society.  Tools, technology, and raw materials met human needs, when combined with human labor.  This also created relationships between products and people that rely on cooperation. 

The way Marx describes human history changing over the centuries revolved around **classes**.  Classes were the driving force behind Marx’s history.  There were **three epochs** Marx described; ancient history (Greece and Rome), feudal society, and capitalist society (modern bourgeous).  Each of these societies had transitional periods called **dialectic**.  Marx thought the working class would overthrow the bourgeoisie, which would be an example of a dialectic.  What I found interesting was how each stage of society was always overthrown by the oppressed.  Not only the oppressed, but a class that was very aware of how oppressed they were.

**Thompson** wanted to understand the experiences of people influenced by the industrialization.  I thought it was interesting that he wasn’t interested in their wages or schedules.  Thompson said “a conscious working class identity formed the basis for collective political action” (39).  Classes seem to form when people share common experiences, and feel an identity based off of them.

**Tom Nairn** and **Perry Anderson** were important because (unlike a Marxist) they believed the working class was structured by social and political environments, not “human agency”.  Both of these men were heavily influenced by a French philosopher, by the name of **Louis Althusser**.  Althusser believed the dominant class controlled ideology, law, and politics; implying the working class was dependent and influenced on/by the dominant class.  

England saw **no revolution** like the one in France, because of many reasons.  Three main ones were the rise of population (10.5 million to 18.1 million in thirty years), the industrial revolution, and the political counter-revolution from 1792-1832 (51).  
