    The introduction to the Marxist historians chapter outlines a brief history of Marxist historians, the major contributors, and their methodology and ends with a concise summary of the historian E.P. Thompson. Authors Green and Troup describe E.P. Thompson as a **"theoretically informed empiricist"** who saw the process of writing history as a critical dialogue between the **evidence** and the author's predetermined **theory**. Personally I think this approach is one of the better methods we've read. If we are to believe that no historian can truly record history in an unbiased or fully "truthful" manner, I would argue that this method is at least adequate because it's based in facts. However, an obvious con to this approach is the ability of the author to "cherry-pick" their evidence to tell their desired narrative. Keeping in mind these pros and cons, this methodology puts the onus squarely on the reader to identify the author's biases and more importantly their agenda in order to seek out counter narratives in attempt to paint a more complete picture. Most of the methodologies that we've read about ultimately rely on the reader to discern what is credible and what is tainted with bias, so I personally don't see this as a departure from or a disadvantage comparatively. 

    Keeping this methodology in mind, I believe E.P. Thompson was successful -in his work Exploitation- in ensuring that, in this article, "[h]istorical practice is above all engaged in this kind of dialogue." (41) Thompson is able to not only use evidence and quotes, but to also expertly weave them throughout his own thoughts as to create a "dialogue" throughout a good portion of the work, particularly the beginning. E.P. Thompson sets up the debate of exploitation in the Cotton and other industries well and supplies ample evidence in order to provide the necessary background to his theory of exploration; however, pages 51 through 58 are lacking considerably in supporting evidence with Thompson providing little to non evidence throughout those seven pages. All-in-all I believe E.P. Thompson did a pretty decent job of creating a dialogue between historical and contextual evidence and his own theories -- the second part of the work obviously could have used more evidence but the first seven pages do a good job of framing the writing and providing enough evidence that it carries the rest of the work. 
