Our selection from Faces of History this week introduced us primarily to Herodotus and Thucydides, two Ancient Greek scholars considered as the founders of history. Beginning with an example of a Janus double-faced statue, Kelley then goes on at quite some length about Herodotus, and at times it appears clear that he favors Herodotus’ multidisciplinary approach to history – one that perhaps appears to be an objective history from a distance, but is made up of carefully selected personal experience, hearsay, and anecdote, in an attempt to “extricate the ‘simple truth’ from the various legends” (Kelley, 21). Herodotus’ scope is vast and his approach appears to be truly multidisciplinary, drawing on essentially all available science, myth, records, and literary works available to support his claims. Kelley makes a halfhearted argument that Herodotus’ method can come across as perhaps fanciful, oftentimes romantic, with stories chosen for their literary potential, woven together with myth to paint a cultural history. However, we are expected to take Kelley’s word (and Herodotus’) that this information was taken from only the most reliable of sources, many of which are Herodotus himself. On occasion, this approach makes it feels like Kelley is pandering to the young academic, painting a picture of Herodotus’ lengthy quest for truth while “traveling, interviewing, and lecturing” over three continents. 

Kelley’s esteem for Herodotus, predictably, colors his introduction to Thucydides. Kelley spends most of the next section comparing Thucydides to Herodotus in every manner possible, as though one does not exist independently of the other, even though there is significant overlap since Thucydides is only a generation younger, and fundamental changes in approach and material. Although the comparison is ostensibly intended to highlight the fundamental differences between Herodotus and Thucydides, in some ways the point becomes lost, steamrolled by Kelley’s expansive discourse on Herodotus and leaving the reader with the impression that they are two sides of the same coin. Perhaps this was Kelley’s intent all along, to encourage the reader to consider both not independent but interdependent.

The remaining sections on Polybius, Diodorus, and Dionysius, came across as overly referential afterthought.
