In the first few chapters of this book Kelley draws a comparison between two founding fathers of history; Herodotus and Thucydides.  I liked how he [Kelley] referenced these **“fathers of history”** throughout the reading.  

Herodotus’ only intention was to **“preserve the memory of worthy deeds from the destructive effects of time”**.  Knowing Herodotus never imagined he would begin what turned into modern history makes his writings and ideas original to me.  He was one of the first to seek reasons for why people do things, which is different from older poets of the time.  

While Herodotus is known as the **“father of history”**, I was really interested in Thucydides’ analytical approach to history.  Kelley said Thucydides **“studied problems [war] not periods”**, which gives him a different, but equally important contribution towards modern history.  I tend to like Thucydides’ style of writing more, and really appreciate his explanation of events in terms of cause (immediate and underlying), and action.

Dionysius of Hilicarnassus said **“history is philosophy teaching by example”**.  That quote really helped me piece together these few chapters on truth and history.  Truth always seems to be the main issue with history as a whole.  Historians can’t agree on one truth, and new information tends to spawn new ideas.  Judeo-Christians believed in historical stories that explained the creation of the universe, but when Natives of the New World believed different creationist stories there was doubt.  It’s interesting that after a thousand years of Christianity, discovering different people believe something else challenged their faith (in a way).  

History giving shape to the past is something I’ve always thought to be true.  Kelley describes it at the beginning of the book as **“the last Western mythical construction”**.  History can be many things, and change in order to appeal to different people.  It can show respect for the dead, honor an important figure, teach morality, etc., which is why no one truth can be agreed upon.  Sometimes historians aren’t even trying to be historians; i.e.; the poets of Greek myth.  In the end historians today have similar thoughts to Herodotus and Thucydides.  We ask similar questions, form biases, and answer questions in a way that makes it our own.
