<b> FACES OF HISTORY</b><br>
Commenter
<br>Pages 1-18; 19-35; 42-47<br><br>
The opening paragraph stayed with me for a while. The whole “Enlightenment was defeated by historicism” thing I wasn’t really inclined to agree with (Kelley 1). 
Anyway, I enjoyed the contrast between Herodotus and Thucydides. I think it is really essential to have both the narrative and the facts. Reading a list of facts can get boring really fast, and I think some of my favorite history books blur this line very well.
These terms are generally agreed upon, as mentioned in the book that “historians need to do a little of both”, but what is compelling to me is that the argument about what is history is as old as the study itself (4). The more I read the more I couldn’t stop thinking about fiction, and how the scope or lens of history is only every set at what we are reading.
his is pretty obvious, especially to our class now, that history was written <b>by someone for someone</b>. But I think <b>fiction</b> should be allowed to squeeze its head in the door. Because a lot of <b>Modernism texts</b> merely reflect, or try to reflect what life was like, or how a lot of individuals felt, by allowing the <b>reader to start <i>feeling</i> the same way</b>. Thus, the magic of fiction. This may be an example of the elusive question: “What does memory mean in a collective sense?” (12). Blah, there’s a reason <i>Catcher</i> is so popular – it captured a greater reality and emotions from a vast amount of people. 
At any rate, the author sort of gets at this by explaining what history has evolved into. You know all that good stuff that we know and love. 
Herodotus has a lot of critics, surprisingly. Maybe he did believe some of the things the ancient Egyptians wrote down or dealt with. 
But in truth, if we were to disappear from the earth and someone was to read out manuscripts right now I bet a lot of the <b>religions</b> that are around could be read as <b>myths</b>. I think it all comes down to what we decide as individuals to <b>assign meaning</b> to. In reality it could be anything. I think the fables are important to be fair. I mean how can they not be. They clearly demonstrate culture. I would have to agree with the author that <b>rhetoric</b> changed a lot of things. Because well, Rhetoric is the art of being <b>persuasive</b> right? Well perfect for historians. 
