Throughout the course of the chapters, Foucault repeatedly talks about the **“gaze”** and sight in medicine.  Particularly he talked about how the “gaze” interacted with and affected medicine.  How the emphasis on sight changed the notion of disease and health.  Further he discussed how disease is really just a **construct** of history that changes.  So how exactly did the medical gaze change the perception of disease?  The medical gaze created a clinical encounter in which the disease was seen **separately** from the body.  That is to say doctors saw diseases not people in their entirety.  This shift in the perception of disease greatly affected how doctors interacted with their patients.  But what was a clinical encounter like prior? And how was disease perceived?

Foucault talks about the space of disease and how disease perviously existed in a **space** without depth or development.  It seems that both the patient and doctor were seen as **obstacles** to disease.  Almost as if it is the patient not the disease that is the problem.  Foucault even says that physician interference with disease was seen as “an act of violence” (p.8).  Admittedly I was fairly confused by the discussion of disease and space.  I’m pretty sure its just an analogy, but I don’t get it.  However Foucault also talks about the **categorization** of diseases and how that came into direct conflict with the medical gaze.  Prior to the medical gaze, disease was categorized by symptoms (or at least thats how I understand it).  But the medical gaze grouped disease based on where they happened on or in the body.  The move away from categorization was an attempt modernize the perception and treatment of disease.  It would seem that the medical gaze **localized** the notion of disease in the body.  
	
It is quite possible that I totally misunderstood the reading, and perhaps the relationship is the opposite of how I understand it.  However if I understand the relationship between the medical gaze and disease properly, it seems quite **similar** to how he understood history.  That is to say that the only way to really study history is to be very specific.  Historians need to look at a very **localized** part of history rather than the **entire body** of history to be successful.  Of course I have no idea whether Foucault made this parallel on purpose or I’m just forcing it because after all this is a historiography class not a history of medicine class.  Either way it seems quite fitting that there is the same total v. specific dichotomy that was saw in his work about history.       
