	The first impression I got in Foucault’s chapter titled spaces and classes was that, like many things during the industrial revolution, old theories and methodological approaches (in this case to medicine) were dying and being replaced by more inherently scientific, mathematical, taxonomical, and quantifiable practices. His discussion of spatialization and classificatory thought is essentially a discussion of causal relationships between variables. “Never treat a disease without being sure of its species” (p.4) means establishing disease as a nominal variable that requires classification and understanding of its causes and effects within a certain setting and then analyzing the “chronological series of events [and] trajectory within the human body.” (p.4)
  
	Foucault later suggests that disease is often perceived of without depth and argues that understanding the origin, evolution, life cycle processes of disease phenomena and that understanding disease requires analogizing it to something easily quantifiable in order to bring it in to the human sense of rational order. Foucault describes the process of how doctors use disease as a “compass” (p.8) with which to guide their decision-making processes and establish classificatory paradigms for how to respond to disease phenomena. Doing so again requires the doctor’s knowledge of the causal relationship that a disease has with its host. 
  
	One of the most significant contributors to the understanding of the causes and effects of disease and evaluating those relationships is being able to measure those causes and effects in some sort of mathematical way and assigning temporal priority (p.12) to variables in the interest of understanding what causes what in the human pathophysiology. Foucault suggests that understanding the causal mechanisms of both medicines and diseases will enable doctors to more successfully map their theoretical approach to disease intervention.
  
	Foucault eventually shifts his discussion from that of the causality of disease to that of the condition of hospitals (clinics) and why hospitals exist in the way that they do. His analysis suggests that hospitals (like anything really) are a product of both the cultural and spatial setting in which they are created and that they, in a way, assume some of the cultural characteristics of the setting from which they arose. 
  
	The last chapter we read includes Foucault’s analysis of the political ramifications of disease and epidemic and how disease phenomenon influence and shape policy decisions and can have a ripple effect of political ramifications. (p. 34) He seems to argue in the end that disease, hospitals, and politics all operate in the same sphere and trade in the same currency, humans. 
