This chapter seems to be focusing on the shift from the ***old*** ways of dealing with disease and illness into ***newer***, more ***advanced*** methods of dealing with medicine in general. Foucault states that “before it is removed from the density of the body, disease is given an organization, hierarchized into families, genera, and species (p. 4), which shows that a more ***analytical*** and ***mathematical*** approach was now being taken to figure out how and why people were getting sick, rather than just having a “this is the only reason for a stomach ache” awareness about it. However, later in the chapter, he discusses how it is often times difficult to define a disease or a cause for why something is happening to someone, and where exactly the problem could be located in their body. He says that “a nosebleed may become hemoptysis or cerebral hemorrhage; the only thing that must remain certain is the specific form of blood discharge” (p. 11), which gives evidence to the fact that doctors were starting to map out the human body and learn more about it and how it functions, enough to know all the potential problems of a nosebleed, even if they weren’t able to pinpoint the exact cause or outcome. Perhaps the most important thing in this chapter is when Foucault states that “Meckel ***measured***, not to ***obtain*** knowledge or mathematical form, but to ***gauge*** the intensity of the pathological quality that constituted the disease” (p. 13). To me this seems like a big deal, because it discusses not only mathematics (as far as measuring and calculating things goes), but also pathological issues that are often times linked with many forms of disease, which was something new during this time period.   

This might be a little farfetched, but as I was reading this, I kept thinking “what if all this medical talk is somehow a metaphor for how historians write history?” It seems as though Foucault discusses the process in which doctors were learning about diseases and the steps that were taken to systematically map out the human body and figure out how to categorize diseases in a way that ***could*** be seen as similar to how ***historians write history*** in the sense of dealing with certain sources and figuring out how to convey the story in the most accurate and objective way possible. As I said, I might be ***completely*** off base here, but it’s just a thought. As for the rest of this piece, I found myself periodically questioning ***what medicine and hospitals*** have to do with ***historiography***. But then I realized, just as in history, medicine has (thankfully) made many changes to advance into what it is today. Even though anything medical-related does not catch my interest at all, I can see why Foucault found it necessary to write this chapter. He was able to discuss the ***changes*** in medicine at the same time he himself was writing a ***different*** kind of history; one that looked at the process of learning about diseases and how to treat them through science and mathematics.      
