It’s really interesting to me that when we think about disease we usually think about humans, right? Or when we think about medicine, we think about disease/illness, you know? These two things are closely correlated together, and I would have liked to live in a time where people were just dropping dead and only God was to blame. Seems fine. Foucault spends a lot of time talking about the space of our bodies being the space for disease. This special dimension is the only place in which disease exists, and medicine is created to destroy the organism. We are the house for disease. And, at least I think, they have a really hard time living outside our bodies on their own. That makes our bodies planets for disease.<br><br>
Understanding that <b>“disease is a species”</b> is necessary to fully understand it. Because while we are constantly developing things to destroy the nasty stuff, we are also committing genocide. Genocide! This stuff reminds me of Orson Scott Card’s novels you know? Anyway, I’m going to start numbering my points in my paragraphs more often when I write long papers. Just for fun. The doctors “intervention is an act of violence”, knew it (8)!<br><br>
I promise I’m trying to get stuff out for Historiography here, but really I just want to talk about how if disease is a species that lives in the confines of our bodies, then how do you explain that it ultimately kills our bodies if left untreated – killing both the body and the disease. Maybe. Probably. I think it’s romantic. <i>I hope we die at the exact same time</i>.<br><br>
After reading the whole disease thing, I’m not really sure how I feel about my life. I mean, he mentions “good medicine”, but I’m not entirely sure there is a good medicine, you know? He is pretty anti hospital as an establishment. It being a <b>“double burden”</b> on society when a man is sick and goes to the hospital, for he can no longer work and he is taxing the system (18). I feel as medicine as a whole has paved a way for these diseases to exist in a more radical way. But at the same time I think that it’s absolutely insane to speak poorly for the institution of medicine because of how much we inherently rely on it now as a basic human need, you know. It’s something that we force people to have, health care, or they face a penalty. You don’t even have to vote… but god damn you if you don’t have health care. Seems fine.<br><br>
I’m not really sure if he is creating a bigger metaphor or allegory here about Historiography, but I sort of don’t want to apply that onto what I’m reading here. Although it feels easy to do so. And really attractive because maybe then I can understand what the hell is actually happening. But I think he might be doing it, or at least showing how immense and intimate studying something is. Something that has all these variables and so forth. Something extremely human such as disease. If you can call it that. 
  
