- In the grand scheme of things I would certainly not consider Petrarch an historian in the academic sense. His hostorical interest revolves around the creation of an actively historiographical prose (p. 134). Petrarch works to emulate the work of the ancients that he idolizes and in a lot of ways I believe he does this, the result of which is what i see as the informal beginnings of what today manifests as separation of church and state. (In so far as that idea can be applied to historical narrative).

- I happen to agree with Petrarch...I am not nearly qualified enough to testify that the rise of Christianity and the rise of "barbarianism" are correlated; but I am certainly of the mind that the religious inclinations of church historians add an additional layer of bastardization to the historical narrative. The fact that still today we marry our chronological awareness to the notion of "the year of our lord" testifies to the churchs' molding history into a useful tool used to consolidate church power.

- This line of reasoning does fit what seems to be the growing trend in renaissance historiographical practice. I see the politicization of historiography as a reversion back to the Roman tradition and away from the church as a way to create and propogate nationalism rather than to consolidate church power and influence over peoples identity. 

- Seemingly as a result of Petrarch's anachronistic idolization of ancient intellectual practice the Florentine renaissance brings about a revival if intellectual and historical culture as a vehicle for creating national pride as opposed to the medieval flourishing of ecclesiastical influence. Florence becomes a progenitor of sorts of what Kelley calls "full-fledged historiography"...perhaps the first. Florentine historians build a chronicle as well as a historiographical tradition around their flourishing intellectual identity. This chronicle is then used as a tool to bridge the gaps and build cultural similarities between those who hold political power and those who that power is held over and give a historical longevity to the reasons for why some hold power and others do not and to weave them all together into a national scene. (p. 143-144)

- If all of these things are true, so called Humanist Cultural History turned professional (I use that word loosely) away from writing about things that happened in the past (chronicle) to why they are important, who they are important for, and what history can do for a person/people/cultures/nations/whatever.

- Add to this the discovery of the new world by Europeans in the late 15th century and the nations/nation-states of Europe had an unprecedented opportunity not only to create and extend national pride by stimulating the European imagination with tales of the wonders accomplished in the new world but to assert their national dominance in the unwritten heirarchy of world powers and contribute to the infant idea of global history (p. 161). I think Petrarch would be thrilled with the later European phenomenon of national self-glorification in the Roman tradition but also the villification of whatever indigenous people that European explorers might encounter and the creation of a new age of "barbarians" to be sumbitted to the "city on the hill."
