In this chapter, there seems to be a shift in the way historians view the past.  Up until this point the past has often been romanticised and seen as the ideal to strive towards.  Many historians in the Renaissance began to view their own age as being ideal.  Kelley states that “*in the light of Le Roy’s enthusiastic statements of learning since the fifteenth century, J. B. Bury was not altogether wrong in listing him among the prophets of the idea of progress.*” (pg. 156).  As modern historians **do we still tend to view our age and our modern methods as being the ideal?** If we do, is this justified?

Kelley discusses the emergence of source criticism as a part of historical methodology.  For example, he discusses Valla’s work on exposing the Donation of Constantine as a forgery, “*Deploying legal, grammatical, rhetorical, geographical, and chronological arguments, Valla ridiculed the author of this supposed imperial concession.*” (pg. 140).  **Why does the issue of source criticism become important now and not sooner?** Does the increasing number of available sources make this evaluation necessary?

Again in this chapter we see the theme that the study of history can be used to avoid the mistakes of the past and emulate the successes.  Political thinking is particularly influenced by this idea. “*So that it is easy, by diligent study of the past, to foresee what is likely to happen in the future in any republic, and to apply those remedies that were used by the ancients, or, not finding any that were employed by them, to devise new ones from the similarity of the events.*” (pg. 148).  How does this view differ from Medieval thinking on politics and the causes of successes and failures?
