As religion, and the world, evolved so did written history.  Written history became A selective telling of events, which usually had a **political or moral agenda**.  For example, Petrarch praised the Romans for acting more than speaking, unlike the Greeks.  **"For us, to act is better than to write"**(133).  Petrarch also wanted the memory of Rome to last as long as the Greek's.  This is why he devoted his life to writing.  It almost seemed like he did this as a duty to Rome more than anything else.

Other interpretations of history developed as writing evolved.  Machiavelli believed all people were motivated by the same **desires** and **passions**; therefore, the future was easy to predict through the study of the past.  He was confused why similar actions yielded different results, and was interested in knowing why this was; “men receive from nature different dispositions and imaginations, and that sometimes the actions of a man were ‘out of harmony with his times and with the type of its affairs’- which was to say that a man sometimes had good and sometimes bad fortune” (148).  Machiavelli also proposed the idea that success of a city (Florence) was formed by **economic convenience** and the founding of **markets**, *not* in **legendary heroes**.

By the sixteenth century it was interesting how texts were brought together for the first time.  This was very significant, and the combining of texts **led to the expansion of knowledge**, especially of foreign cultures.  People were able to read about alien cultures, which made them confront the fact that their ideas and beliefs were not the only ones.  The combining of these texts led to a great expansion of knowledge (Especially of the New World), but Kelley also says it was the beginning of historians to **dramatically** judge the past.    Past and present historians are no different in the way that they’re all trying to find true wisdom *”perennial philosophy”*.  Perennial philosophy is mainly the study of history from the mythical beginning through Christian philosophy (154).  
