In The Archaeology of History, Foucault tears apart the very basis of history – that there is some kind of underlying structure to it all, and that the historian’s job is to ascertain this structure. Instead, he offers up a four-part approach to questioning the veracity of history, or maybe to be more accurate, an approach that focuses on the discontinuities, the idiosyncrasies, the problems inherent in history. This approach, of course, is fraught with problems of its own – by only ever looking at that which is problematic, how do you ever make sense of history? How do you learn anything other than pessimism and nihilism? 

One of the strongest points in Foucault’s argument was about including unfinished works and sketches in an author’s “oeuvre” – if we are looking to make sense of a body of work, then we should only ever include those works that are finished, complete, as the artist or author intended them to be, because then we are clearly seeing the author’s message as they intended it to be seen. But what if we include those works that are unfinished, incomplete, or idiosyncratic? What can we learn from these unfinished works? How does that contribute to our view of the author, the time period in which the author resided, the view of the world that the author possessed? What can the discontinuities, the idiosyncrasies, the problems tell us? Alternatively, what don’t they tell us?

One idiosyncrasy in Foucault’s argument is his complete disregard (discontinuity?) for the consumption of humans. We as a race like to consume things, and sometimes the only motivation behind including an unfinished work in an oeuvre is innate human curiosity. Perhaps we just want to see things created by artists we admire, or emulate, or identify with, despite the level of finished-ness. How else do you explain the fascination with celebrity news, the proliferation of tabloids? Foucault is a fairly modern philosopher, so I would imagine he was reasonably familiar with tabloids and celebrity news, in my opinion a prime example of humans consuming for the sake of consumption – sometimes the stories are carefully curated by the celebrity or the industry, sometimes they are an invasion of privacy and give us a glimpse into moments not intended for general consumption by the public. Maybe he couldn’t be bothered to philosophize about such a base and tasteless subject? What does that tell us about Foucault?
