Foucault describes the way that history had recently developed, with historians becoming more interested in the larger underlying structures that shape the world and with long term change rather than focus on specific events.  On the other hand, other areas of study linked to history (history of philosophy, history of thought, and history of literature) have begun to look instead at the more specific and individual cases and events.  This seems to be a flip in the way that these fields have traditionally approached their subjects.  Foucault believes that the change in both of these fields originates from their questioning of documents.  Previously in the study of history, we have seen that historical documents were not approached in a particularly critically way, however this has changed as history continues to develop.  Here, Foucault essentially points out another development in source criticism.  He discusses how in historical thought people now take into account the fact that they only have limited information that is based off of what sources have survived, “the theme and the possibility of the *total history* begin to disappear, and we see the emergence of something very different that might be called a *general history.*” (pg 9).  There is a movement away from an all-encompassing history in favor of a more 'accurate' but condensed history.


Foucault argues that to be a competent historian, it is necessary to deconstruct the themes and ideas that are taken for granted and look at them critically.  Themes that are often universally accepted as a way to organise and describe create unity may in fact just be constructs that hold no weight in reality.  Foucault believes that through this deconstruction one will be able to “free them of all the groupings that purport to be natural, immediate, universal unities, one is able to describe other unities, but this time by means of a group of controlled decisions,” (pg 29) and therefore be able to approach history with a more open mind, negating some bias that our these culturally constructed themes impose.  In this approach, even the themes and ideas that are thought about in relation to history require a critical assessment before they can be properly used.  Foucault goes beyond just criticism of his sources, he also attempts to critique the way that the historian views the world.  Looking at, and then subsequently deconstructing, the tools used to organise thoughts and ideas then becomes for Foucault an important part of the historical method, his focus in writing seems to be hyper-criticism.
