 I am not positive on how well I understood the *Archeology of Knowledge* so my comment not completely make sense but I am going to try my best. Just when I did not think my conception of history would be more challenged I read Foucault. My understanding of this reading is that historians are once again limited on what they themselves use as evidence. Foucault seems to argue that historians have tried to create a total, unified history by forming multiple sources into one meaning. *“In that area where, in the past, history deciphered the traces left by men, it now deploys a mass of elements that have to be grouped, made relevant, placed in relation to one another to form totalities”* (7). What I took this to mean is that historians take bits and pieces of historical documents and combine them to prove their argument. For example, someone writing about the Reformation will take a passage from the writings of Martin Luther, John Calvin, Pope Leo X, and Ulrich Zwingli to decipher and create one total event in history. In this sense, historians *create* their own histories. They formulate a hypothesis of a historical event and use material to support their argument. Based on what I felt Foucault was arguing, there is a fundamental problem with this. 
 
The problem historians are making is they are combining sources to create one theory, when these sources could be a complete contradiction to each other. By just using snippets of different sources, historians are possibly taking historical statements out of their original context. For example the statement, *“the cat is blue”* (I know weird statement but just go with it), can be a defined a number of different ways. Someone could be saying that the cat is the *color* blue, which can either mean the cat’s fur is actually blue or the fur was *dyed* blue. Another possible meaning is that the cat is sad. The statement could also have a different idea of cat; is it a small house-cat, or a big cat like a lion? The meaning of the statement would be entirely obvious in its full context of the story about a white house-cat that had blue paint spilled on him. But when this sentence is taken out of its context it can mean whatever someone wants it to mean. The same goes for historians in looking at what they want to use from primary sources. This is extremely interesting to me because it was something I never truly thought of before. Historians can take any statement they want and combine it with another historical statement to create a common meaning. It is a strong possibility that these statements used could be talking about two completely different things when they remain in their original context. *So who is history for? Maybe the historian and his/her idea of what the truth is?*
