class="author">cody</
Medieval Historiography

History, and the study of it, took on a different role in medieval times than it had previously.  It has been said that the Greeks were the first to develop a real concept of “history” as we know it, particularly Herodotus, who is considered by many to be the father of history.  Roman history was profoundly inward-looking, and focused almost exclusively on Rome itself and its origins, which became intermingled with its cultural creation myths.  Once the empire fell, however, the other nations of Europe, which had arisen from the so-called “barbarian” tribes that had existed on the periphery of Rome, began to write their own history.  This also coincided with the rise of Christianity, as both the history and politics of Europe became closely linked with religion and the Catholic Church.  Chronologies, recording sacred events, were a prominent form of history as well.  But the study of history itself was mainly academic, being counted among the liberal arts.  

During the middle ages, history came to be considered one of the liberal arts, subjects that only the wealthy, well-educated aristocracy learned about.  As such, it was not essential for the average citizen to learn history, but was part of the pantheon of fields that made up a “higher” form of knowledge that included philosophy, theology, and literature, among others.  According to Kelley, the study of history was at the bottom of the intellectual hierarchy of liberal arts, and only certain aspects of it were truly important, to educate people on “what was worth remembering.” (p.100)
In stark contrast to the historiographical patterns of classical Rome, the study of European society and cultures in medieval times was not centered around a singular base, i.e. Rome itself.  Whereas all roads once led to Rome and everything and else had been secondary, now there had been a shift away from that center of mass, and other European nations began to come into their own, and develop their own national identities as English, French, and German.  These former “outsiders,” or satellites of the Roman Empire subsequently began writing their own history, and recording it from their own perspective.  European historiography now had multiple distinct viewpoints, rather than one.  Each nation, which had formerly been a part of Roman-conquered territory, now sought to validate itself as a distinct society.  

Another striking aspect of medieval historiography is the emergence of authors like Salvian and Jordanes, who dared to criticize the apparent all-importance of Rome, and the habit of classical writers to convey it as the center of the universe.  Salvian, a 5th-century from Gaul (modern day France) even made the claim that the Romans were not “in any way superior to the Goths and Vandals,” and blamed Roman society, rather than the barbarians, for bringing about its own fall (p.105) Jordanes was a bureaucrat from Constantinople, who later wrote about the history of Rome, taking a rather cynical view of its “greatness.”  He even went so far as to compare the Goths to the classical Greeks in terms of wisdom and philosophical thinking.  These, and other writers, reflected a new pattern challenging the importance of Rome as the epicenter of the civilized world, and the validation of the so-called barbarians as legitimate civilizations and societies in their own right, while they had previously been a mere footnote in the recorded history of Europe.  
As the various nations of Europe began to come into their own, each one developed a different view of its history, where it had once been either written off as a barbarian tribe on the periphery of the civilized world, or just one of many conquered lands under the yoke of Rome.  This rise of national traditions was represented by English, German, and French historians, each of whom focused on the distinct historiography of their own nation.  The new task of these writers was to validate the historical roots of their respective nations, by tracing them back as far as possible.  This required recognizing the different barbarian tribes, such as the Franks, the Huns, and the Goths, which had evolved into the French, Germans, and English, respectively.  Gregory of Tours, a bishop and saint born in modern-day France, worked to compile an ecclesiastical history of the Frankish monarchy, dating all the way back to the Gauls, in his ten volume History of the Franks (p.108) The Venerable Bede, and English monk, and one of the most prominent historians of medieval times, traced the origins of Britain to the occupation of the British Isles by Julius Caesar, the withdrawal of the Romans, and the local rise of the Christian Church. (p. 110)

Another notable aspect of medieval historiography is the prominence of chroniclers.  One of the most famous of these was the Christian theologian and philosopher Augustine, who wrote numerous chronicles during the fourth and fifth centuries, and also taught rhetoric.  While similar to historians in their basic goal, chroniclers were predominantly concerned with keeping a record of the Years of Our Lord, and a timeline of sacred events throughout human history. (p. 120.)  In this sense, while historians blended their craft with philosophy, theology, and literature, chroniclers were more akin to statisticians in their methods of recording raw data.  Both were concerned with truth and facts, but histories were more eloquent, and often laden with rhetoric and poetry, which is why the study of history was counted among the pantheon of liberal arts.  

After the fall of Rome, Christianity became the standard for nearly all of Europe, and Christian values were repeated and reflected in various forms, including historiography.  During the Middle Ages history was almost inextricably tied to theology, and the history of the world as written in the Bible.  It was also tied to the history of Rome, as many key events in Christianity had to do with the Roman Empire, from the crucifixion of Jesus of Nazareth, to the persecution of Christians by the Pagan Emperors, and the rule of the Byzantine Emperors like Justinian, who were Christians themselves.  Some historians, however, looked back at Rome with a lighter attitude than others.  The German bishop and chronicler Otto of Freising, for instance, celebrated the Romans, while his mentor, Augustine, had claimed that the city was “sunk in sin.”(p. 124) Although Europe was now divided into multiple distinct civilizations which were all writing their own history, Christianity, along with Roman roots, was the common thread between them all, as evidenced by the fact that chronicles and other records throughout Europe were almost invariably written by members of the clergy.  

By the end of the Roman Empire, historiography had undergone a transition from being centralized on Rome itself, to being individualized by multiple, distinct societies that had arisen from the ashes.  Romans, history had strictly looked inward, focusing almost exclusively on Rome itself and its origins, and even becoming intermingled with its cultural creation myths.  However, once the other nations of Europe, which had evolved from the so-called “barbarian” tribes that had existed on the periphery of Rome, began to write their own history, different historical viewpoints began to arise.  This also coincided with the rise of Christianity, as both the history and politics of Europe became closely linked with religion and the Catholic Church.  Chronologies, recording sacred events, were a prominent form of history as well.  But the study of history itself was mainly academic, being counted among the liberal arts.
