**On History’s Universe: A historiographical analysis of Universal Histories**

Historical Universality can be defined in multiple ways or multiple avenues. The most pertinent are either the creation of a complete narrative of all peoples in the world, or at least the “known” world, or the explanation of events using what can be simplified as “universal themes” or “causes” in society, as seen by a society. These two components, collectively, form a clear trajectory in the historical record. With the rise of Rome we see political and philosophical speculation, fueled by questions of governance and unity, which eventually gets abandoned with Rome itself. In the absence of this rich historical body, we see the rise of a master theological narrative which subordinates all history, depressing the status of the field and regulating history to a chronical. Finally, we see the secularization of history and a reverence for the ancient past, reviving the political discourse and philosophical discussion of Greco-Romans, but with the new addition of rationalism and secularism as dominant historiographical forces. Finally, the emphasis on “Truth”, rationalism, and science lead to the nearly complete destruction of universal history in the modern narrative, due to its status as speculative, with an uncertain future for the once vibrant perspective.

**Ancient Narratives**

Universal history as a discrete field is a relatively modern concept, yet the "idea" of universality can be traced further back. In mythic poetry we can see human themes which transcend the particulars, which is why Homers Odyssey is still pertinent today, along with other examples. Furthermore, philosophers, central to Greecian thought, used history as a rhetorical tool and source of discussion, and also spoke to universal themes. As such, despite the limits of Greecian perspectives, we can see universal elements to their writings. Rome, meanwhile, both as subject of Greek writers and from its own historians, exemplifies the trend of *transmitting* a universal message.

Herodoteus, a major Greccian author writing not long after the first Peloponesian war, wrote histories which not only detailed a myriad of cultures, but also sought to explain wars and other international events using inherent human nature, such as Greed and Wrath (Kelley, 21). His explanations for why Greece successfully won the war involve not simply tactics of technology, but also their belief in Freedom and Law (Kelley, 21). Herodoteus sought to explain events as well as relate them, and in this way similarities to mythic authors can be seen. However his political analysis lacks true universality due to his view of the cultural uniqueness of Greece. Herodoteus envisioned *different* trends for Persia, which he viewed as inevitably falling into monarchy (Liddel, 20) than Greece, for whom tyrannical monarchy was an impossibility (Liddel, 21).  Thus, while he had universal narratives, his flaws in larger trend analysis prevent him from being viewed as a truly “universal” historian.

Another notable universal historian was Polybius, a major Greek historian who moved to Rome during its republic and wrote during its expansion and rise to power. Polybius sought not only to explain this rise but also place it within the larger trend of civilization (Kelley, 31). His analysis the rise and fall of Rome was one of the first of many such histories which sought to use Rome as evidence for larger historical trends. To Polybius, Rome rose due to its fear of the gods, and emphasis on a mixed constitution (Kelley, 34). This both explained its unparalleled expansion and provided a means which could stave off what he saw as an “inevitable” decay of civilization (Kelley, 33). He even provided a mechanism for this decay, building on Grecian authors and examples, which details how Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy would inevitably be corrupted (Kelley, 34). Only a mixture of all three could endure. Rome was not unique simply due to being “Roman”, but due to having qualities which could be exemplified and analyzed. In this way he can be seen as one of the first truly universal historians, who takes a massive and transcendental view of the world. 

Strabo, another notable Greeco-Roman author, encapsulates what universality there was in Roman-era historiography. Writing as Rome transitioned from republic to Empire, Strabo had the benefit of an outsider’s cultural background, like Polybius, yet was born in Italy. While he is not viewed as a universal historian in the sense that Polybius is, he nonetheless shows how Rome viewed it’s *destiny* as arising out of universal causes, and *applying* universally. Starbo, fundamentally, addressed Rome’s rise to power as being a benefit of its well managed government (Morcillo, 88). He particularly viewed unified governments-as opposed to disparate, unguided ones-as being superior, due to their capacity to plan (Morcillo, 90). Because of this, the planned, superior Roman government, which progressively spread and encompassed the Mediterranean, was a *universal* destiny for the world (Morcillo, 95).

The Romans themselves had their own view of their success. Virgil, a notable poet and writer, exemplified the self-image of Rome (55). Writing after Rome had begun it’s imperial ambitions, Virgil stated that the Romans “keep universal rule over nations in these ways; by maintain peace by means of law, by doing justice to the lowly, by bringing down the haughty” (Mierow). Thus Rome both had the *destiny and duty* to take control of the known world and civilize it (Kelley, 33). Caesar himself couched his conquests in the "Imperial Mission" of Rome, for instance, showing the rhetorical influence and power of this ideal (Kelley, 53). The Roman Empire, as such, formed a history which could be *imposed*, a view of humanity *in general* which allowed Rome *in particular* dominance. 

However this very rise to Empire would later prove to be Rome’s own undoing. Such historians as Tacitus viewed the imperial administration as hopelessly corrupt (63). In his explanations of why, Tacitus framed societies as progressing from innocence, into despotism, later corrected by law, which would eventually over correct and proliferate itself into another form of despotism (63). This progression of empires, mirroring Polybius on Rome’s rise, did not seek to explain its misfortunes as merely being events, but rather inevitable *trends* in human history. 

**Theocracy and History**

Yet as Rome fell completely its institutions and values would be destroyed, to be replaced by the Catholic Church, which waxed as Rome waned. Christian theological history came to encompass *both* of the main forms of universality; it both told a narrative story of “all” mankind, and told a story whose themes could apply to any culture. It also contained that essence of *transfer and empire* that Rome managed to encompass, allowing its story to be sent to other places and peoples. 

In the earliest and formative period of Christianity, the major authors tended to be hematic monks later deemed “Church Fathers” for their theological contribution. The most notable was Augustine, a major figure both in historical writings and the religious thinking of the early church. The ideas of original sin and the framework of Christian redemption are sourced in him, for instance, and he is regarding as a Church Father by Catholics. More pertinently, he wrote the *City of God*, in response to hearing of the Fall of Rome from nearby North Africa. He serves as one of the major sources of historical writings and analysis regarding this highly transitional time period. His student, Orosius, further built on and clarified his writings after Augustine died during the siege of Carthage by Vandal Barbarians. These figures exemplify the blend of theocratic analysis and historical writing that dominated history and created the foundation of a paradigm which lasted for a century or more.

However as Rome was replaced by the “Barbarians” who conquered her, these narratives needed to expand to encompass the “Barbarian” peoples who inherited this Christain empire. In order to do this, authors burrowed from earlier narratives of the Barbarians as a purifying force. Salvian, a Frankish contemporary of Augustine, wrote that “Barbarians are more chaste and pure than the Romans” and that “It is our vicious lives alone that have conquered us”, as early as the 300’s (Kelley, 105). Other authors later expanded these wonderings into more coherent narratives of the Barbarian peoples, using this narrative to explain their rise to power in a Christian framework (Kelley, 105).


This paradigm related how the new history was unique because it grasped the truth of God, thus differentiating it from earlier histories (Kelley, 90). In this manner historiography, and history itself as well, was framed as the progression from Pagan mistakes to Christian Truth (Kelley, 91). Orosius further linked past events such as the pillaging of Babylon to the horrors of his time, and provided a master-narrative for the rise of Rome itself; Rome rose in order to provide the framework for the conversion of Europe to Christianity and the establishment of the will of God in law (Kelley, 94). 

As Christianity became hyper-dominant, it substituted “Theology” and “Philosophy” for “History” as a mechanism for explanation and the discovery of causes (Kelley, 100). As such Histories were generally regulated to merely chronicling and explaining particular events, and placing them inside the larger paradigm of Christian history. Often, this manifested, as in the case of Bede, in parallel genealogical accounts showing Christain chronology, from the flood, to the “modern” era of Barbarian kings (Kelley, 110). This narrative-which encompassed what was perceived as all humanity-was thus truly universal, but divorced from particular historical analysis, and thus all histories began to utilize universal Christian themes, but did not truly innovate beyond them (Kelley, 124-125). 

By the early medieval period the origins of nation states, and thus their unique histories and interpretations, were written as a coherent field in this tradition. Such authors as Jordanes, telling the Gothic story, Gregory of Tours for the Franks, and Bede for the English, all related more local perspectives that detailed pre-Christian tribes and the newer nations they became (Kelley, 106). However all of these histories were fundamentally Christian. The endeavor wasn’t so much to create a history of the Barbarians, but to link the history of the Barbarians to the history of Christianity; Jordanes account culminates in conversion (Kelley, 107), and Gregory exemplified Christian rulers and equates conversion and success (Kelley, 109). History differentiated, but only as a way of showing how Christian chronology, interpreted literally from the flood, related to the chronology and genealogy of their local subjects. These endeavors both told a universal chronical of mankind, and told a universal *story* that explained that chronical. Further analysis was relegated to detailing local events and religious events as *pertinent* to that narrative. Attempts to even relate divergent narratives, such as seen with Geoffrey of Monmouth’s writings on Merlin and Arthur, resulted in scorn for Barbarism (Kelley, 113 and 123). 

**The Rise of Secularism**

It would take a significant amount of time for this Catholic paradigm to fall. In the Renaissance we begin to see the beginnings of this. Historical authorship becomes more secular, often revering Pagan authors and dealing more with the now rapidly crystalizing nation states of Europe. By the reformation this secular perspective had come to largely dominate the historical field, and particular histories became more popular. As these smaller scale historical 

History had, in some ways, changed purpose; authors such as Machiavelli wished to use it to compel political action, not merely relate how a people fit into the Christian narrative (146). Humanism began to oppose religious narratives. As such, history began to focus more on the particular people and places of study; universalism in this period is most notable for its absence. Stories about city states (138), France (142), and Spain (156) were largely ignoring any attempts at universal narrative. This is not to say that Christianity vanished; in some places, such as Spain, authors utilized a universal Christian message or conversion to justify Spanish imperial ambitions and to explain the unknown (158). However by large Europe was rediscovering the art of creating narratives without an overt religious theme.

This would become more obvious during the Reformation, which contained significant literary and religious modifications. On the one hand, humanism and secularism became more powerful as ideologies, and economics and technology favored the creation of more literary works. The trends that began in the renaissance became more influential and powerful. Authors such as Bebel, who began to extort the glories of Germany and Le Caron who encouraged the development of a French identity as independent form antiquity, represented a departure from previous tradition. They focused on neither Roman common heritage nor Christianity to give common purpose, but began to relate the national traditions of local states. In this way, they emphasized particular causes over universal ones, and the overarching narrative of Christianity much more weakly than previous authors. 

As an exception to this trend, there was also an outpouring of new religious histories. The new Protestant churches needed to interpret their place in the past, and to do so they had to create a new History. Authors such as Flacius Illyricus wrote on the transition of empires and held that the Reformation was merely a reconnection with the origins of Christianity (Kelley, 171). Others, such as Jean Crespin, emphasized how Martyrdom united all peoples, giving them something to aspire too (Kelley, 172). 

However these writings, even as they engaged with the universal Christian narratives, became more segregated from the larger body of literature. That is not to say that there was a sudden lack of Christian influenced narratives of any denominations, and indeed Bishop Boussuet in the late 1600’s revisited and revised the narrative begun by Augustine of the fall from grace of man, emphasizing the divine providence of Rome and similar themes (Kelley, 212-213). However the long history of universalism being limited to Theologian Historians was truly fading, a byproduct of the expansion of humanism and, most importantly, rationalism into the larger field of history.  

At the same time, we see a resurgence of the analysis of empires. Vico utilized Roman authors in his analysis of historical trends, working with Tacitus and other authors (Kelley, 214). Vico attempted to blend Roman focused and divine focused narratives, mixing “profane” and “sacred” history, giving primacy to Christianity but still addressing other cultures and religions (Kelley, 214). In these authors we see attempts to explain specific historical events in universal themes-answering the why of the rise and fall of Rome, thus making that event indicative of the Rise and Fall of Empires. This, of course, is very similar to the way Polybius utilized Rome’s narrative, and these traditions did not exist in an ex nihlo vacuum; they arise, consciously, from those earlier writings. 

However unique to these new universal histories, when viewed as a whole, was the scientific and rational perspective. The new ideal of rationalism, building on the humanist ideal of progress, conceived of man as inevitably becoming more rational and more moral. God may factor into this discussion, and often did, but his favor was no longer some ineffable power that could be used as the default explanation for events; God was part of the story, not the whole story.

This is exemplified by authors such as Leibniz, a major German author who utilized an “organic” metaphor for his understanding of human history. Leibniz is not uniquely a historian or philosopher, and is a wildly recognized mathematician who is notable for independently developing calculus from Newton; he is representative of how varied the interests of these intellectuals were. It is important to note that Leibniz, and those like him, still utilized God in their writings; they merely utilized secular thought, rather than theology, as an explanatory mechanism. 

Regardless, Leibniz viewed history as analogous to one animal body; Chronology represents bones, genealogy nerves, motives are like spirits, and the detail to the mass of flesh (Kelley, 213). Thus, history can be viewed, when freed of accidents and particulars, as a continuous and related body, with internal logic and connection (Kelley, 213). This last sequence is where the emerging science of history becomes important. By making history more secular and encouraging discussion and speculation, they created a competition of ideas which, in turn, created a struggle for Truth. This scientific approach to universal history, and the attempt to purge history of falseness, is in *contrast* to ancient authors for whom history cared more for rhetoric. This transformation not only drastically changed the field of universal history, but ultimately killed it. Thus, the eventual trajectory of universal history, from the early 

**The future of universal history**

Universal histories, by their nature, require speculation and assumptions. It is inherently difficult, if not impossible, to come to one “correct” master narrative, at least in the sense of universal history as a history of *causes* as opposed to events. However a simple chronology of history from “The Beginning” can at least be *perceived* as possible, in that one can get “closer” to the “truth”, and moving forward there were attempts to accomplish such. Marx, for instance, is viewed as a “universal” historian due to his master-narrative of revolutionary cycles (Christain, 5). However the very fact that Karl Marx, one of the most controversial historical figures in the century, represents one of the “last” universal history writers is telling.

As historical scholars compete, historical scholars would increasing blend scientific methods and thinking, paralleling major scientific developments, in an attempt to become more “objectively” correct (Christian, 6). Universal history would eventually become a causality of these developments, as many scholars contended that it was impossible to refute the claims (Christain, 6). In turn, history turned to two differing micro-views; nationalism (Christain, 6), and more recently an attempt to capture disenfranchised perspectives or similar microhistories. These stories are rarely comprised into massive master narratives, and such narratives are often disparaged as being speculative and logically unfounded. In this sense, the pursuit of history as a science is responsible for the death of a large segment of the purpose of history. 

This does not, per say, need to be. A view of history as less concerned with truth does, of course, open it up to more varied interpretation, even if said interpretation is accepted as speculation. However even within the semi-dominant paradigm of “historical science”, history *should* have some capacity to form larger narratives. All sciences, in fact, form a *specific part* of what is ultimately a *larger story* of the universe, a complete picture that arises from a specific field. Even if history is a science, the limit on universal narratives almost *must* be self-imposed by its scholarship, an artifact of *how academia views history* rather than *history itself*. Thus, by viewing the past and understanding the historical context of universal histories, it may be possible to revive the faltering and/or dead field, and write a history in the old tradition again.
