Like the annales school, quantitative history relies on data to fill in gaps found in traditional narrative history.  Quantitative history takes an important step in that they point out the shortcomings of their own work and discuss the methods they will use to attempt to overcome or compensate for these shortcomings.  This school of thought sees the importance of being historiographically self-aware in an attempt to correct for any bias that might occur due to their methodology.


In his work, Wall specifically tells the reader what his methodology was and what sources he used to collect his data.  He then goes on to list possible shortcomings due to this approach, and discusses how he will attempt to avoid these.  For example, he discusses the difficulty of choosing a random selection of sources for the preindustrial period, stating that there are very few listings and that many are of low quality.  He then explains to the reader which criteria he used in choosing his sources, *“that the divisions between households should be clearly identified, that the relationships of all or nearly all persons to the head of the household should be specified, and that the terms used should be unambiguous.”* (pg 154).


One of the strong points of this approach is that it clearly addresses the historiographical questions that we have been discussing all semester.  The issues with this approach become less problematic because they are pointed out and discussed, allowing the reader a clear understanding of the possible bias in the work.  Up to this point, it has often fallen to the reader to find and interpret the significance of this bias, but this approach diminishes this need.  While the need to identify bias is no longer at the forefront, the approach still encourages critical thinking in that it gives several options and reasons for the reader to consider.  In Wall’s work he gives the data, but makes clear that it could mean a number of different things, *“The Poor Law authorities might have modified their attitudes toward paying maintenance to widows in their own households, or the economic situation might have changed in a way that made households headed by widows less viable or gave widows a role to play in hoter households, perhaps as child-minders.”* (pg 164).  Wall still ultimately leaves it up to the reader to decide what they believe, and his approach and methodology helps to alleviate (although not eliminate entirely) some of the bias that has traditionally been part of historical writing.
