Quantitative history is as you would expect history that relies on **numerical data**.  They use demographic, economic, and it seems like any other statistical data they can their hands on to explain why things happened.  Often times this type of work is utilized to compare the past in a manner that isn’t possible with other historical methods.  There is the potential for quantitative history to be **more objective** because it forces you to take a step back and really look at your data to see if it makes sense (ridiculous example of the Mississippi p.145). However purely number driven analysis would **fall short** of creating a full narrative, so they use content analysis to fill the holes left by the statistics.  Another key factor of quantitative history is the **awareness** of the shortcomings of incomplete data they are often dealing with.  Understanding that what we have is in all likelihood not the whole story.  The upswing for this type of history is its **inclusion** of people who were left out of history. In the past many times there are only good records for a few big-wig kind of people, quantitative history can look at the peasants or the servants and see what their life was like. 

The piece included by Richard Wall appears to have **all the aspect** of good quantitative history.  He included several tables with data which is to be expected along with analysis about what the data means.  On several occasions including the very last paragraph Wall **recognizes the shortcomings** of his data saying that it is **incomplete and limited** due to large amounts of missing data.  He included what would be content analysis by including a variety of possible explanations or influencing factor that weren’t revolved around the data.  Wall told a story about average English household and how it changed overtime founded on statistical data along with factors outside the data.  

So it may or may not be obvious, but I **super love** this kind of history.  I think the use of data is a step in the right direction as far as **objectivity** is concerned.  When you are working with data you look more closely at the story the data is laying out and if it makes sense.  Additionally the recognition that the data may be incomplete and/or misleading seems **honest and straigth foward**.  When you add in discussion of non-data things, it just makes quantitative history even better in my opinion.  To me this is the best method of history we have seen, but clearly I am a little biased. 
