Technological advancements have given historians the ability to analyze large amounts of data.  Quantitative analysis stems from more systematic record keeping, the advent of the census and computers. The data collected and examined allows historians to learn more about populations whose personal historical footprint may be all but gone, including marginalized groups. “The comparative sweep which quantitative history can afford gives historians enormous scope for raising, theorizing and answering questions that more traditional narrative history might not. (Green and Troup, 142)

Economic history in the 1950’s used statistical models as well as counterfactuals. Counterfactuals consider what the past would look like if something was changed. For example, how would the southern economy have developed without slavery. Although these are interesting questions to ponder I do not believe that data sets can reveal any truth from the consideration of the counterfactuals; there are too many dependent variables that are affected by the missing condition. 
Another issue of the economic model is that the data collected is determined by the model. We can compare this with the issue of which stories are included in a narrative history. The data that are left out or not considered can change the results. In this example, I am reminded of Jenkins when he says that we are studying a historian’s interpretation of history, in this case based on the data collected or excluded.

Serial history uses similar data points over a period to find change. This is a great way to use the data to find trends and inconsistencies over a long time. One problem with this approach would be changes in definitions of words, or cultural understandings. The historian using this method must ensure that he is measuring the same this even though it may be called something different during the time he is examining.  There also may be outside variables affecting the results that the historian may not consider. Also, as the Mark Twain quote suggests, some conclusions extrapolated from even the most rigorously researched data can be ridiculous. 
“Members of pre-industrial societies lived so much closer to the margins of subsistence than we do …. demography was the determinant of social and economic life.” (green and Troup, 145) 
Historical demography gets its data from census records, lists of deaths and births, and church records of baptisms and marriages. Missing information can be tediously reconstructed into biographies. However, this method seems like too much work that would produce a statistically insignificant N number. 

Another way for quantitative historians to study the past is through content analysis. This technique examines language usage as data points to extrapolate larger trends in a culture. Historian using this technique must be careful that they understand the correct usage and meaning of the terms they are examining in the time.

Richard Wall’s examination of household size in England is a strong example of quantitative history. He is careful to explain all the possible variables that may affect the data. He also explains carefully when sufficient data is lacking or absent. Wall is exceptionally careful in considering all the implications of his data and not blindly jumping to conclusion. 

Although I was critical of quantitative history as introduced in the annals chapter, I have changed my mind. I believe that data can be used to provide a view and a context of history that may have been previously hidden. Although we must remember that because an historian may be using data point it does not necessarily mean that he is closer to the “Truth”. 

