The Quantitative method of historiography is how it sounds, a method that focuses on numerical data, particularly statistics to help paint a larger historical narrative. These data points are often based on economic factors such as the price of grains and other goods, as well as demographic aspects such as population growth and decline. 


The chapter describes quantitative historians as aware of the potential shortcomings of this method, which include the potential for falsified numbers for political purposes or other agendas, numbers that were recorded wrong purely out of human error and problems with the lack of a standard practice of mathematics and statistical gathering until fairly recently. Just merely being self-aware, in my opinion, does not absolve these inadequacies, nor does it properly account for them. There is no way to absolutely determine the accuracy of many of these numbers, simply because you often have nothing to check them against. Similarly it is nearly impossible to account for human motivations that you cannot possibly be aware of, therefore it is difficult to truly assess a numbers accuracy. The advantage of this methodology—if implemented as accurately as possible—is that it allows for another lens of history to be examined, often revealing information that would not have otherwise been exposed. The inclusion of quantitative data allows the historian to examine a larger area of the historical phenomena or era they are studying, and if used correctly allows for a more complete narrative. I don’t want it to seem as if I hate quantitative history, so far I have not been opposed to any of the methodologies if used in conjunction with other established methods in a more complete survey of data. It’s only when a methodology is used as the main or predominant method for studying history, that I have a problem with it. 


The book uses an example from historian Richard Wall titled “The Household: Demographic and Economic Change in England, 1650-1970.” As apparent from the title, Wall adheres to the quantitative methodology of historiography and writes this article following the tenants almost to a tee. Wall provides a plethora of numerical data, including a data table on nearly every page and quantitative analysis throughout the article. Wall acknowledges the gaps in his data, but its unclear how much work he did to verify the numbers he did have at his disposal and how that verification was performed. That said, overall I feel that wall did a great job of following the qualitative methodology, I just prefer that he also equally include other methodologies to try to implement a broader, or more complete, study of history. 
