Similarly to the *Annales*, ***Quantitative History*** relies very heavily on the use of ***data*** and a bunch of ***numbers***. As stated at the beginning of the chapter, Quantitative History “covers a range of methodologies and theoretical bases, linked by their reliance on numerical data” (p. 141). I have never really thought about or even realized how heavily a lot of historical writings rely on ***quantification*** for different purposes. The use of different models within Quantitative History seem to be of importance as well, because “modeling procedures allow a wider scope of investigation than does traditional economic history” (p. 142). The problem with these models, however, is the ***assumption*** that all human beings “behave in an economically rational way” and that “there are no exogenous variables” (p. 143). So although these models help with economic data, economic models don’t mesh well with the telling of history. It is also impossible for any historian to take account of all the possible factors (p. 143). Overall, Quantitative History has made it possible to achieve more concrete comparisons and differences between societies over the course of history, and has encouraged historians to extend their range of topics and sources (p. 148), especially with computer databases coming into play in the 20th century. 

Although I do agree that quantification in history is important, the excerpt from Wall’s work seemed a little dry to me. I could absolutely see the use of data was necessary to make his point, but all the numbers and charts thrown into it made me feel a little ***disconnected*** from the ***story*** he was attempting to narrate, and there definitely was a story present, it’s just not what we are used to, or even what we expect when reading historical writings. It also doesn’t help that I am not a numbers person, so I almost immediately lost interest in this piece. However, I can see why this method of historiography was developed, because in a sense it is a more ***concrete*** form of telling history (even if it is a little boring), because of all the numbers and statistical data. For whatever reason, numbers tend to bring comfort to many people, because numbers are always so heavily associated with something being a ***true “fact,”*** and statistical data is more ***difficult*** to ***debunk*** as being completely ***false***. With that being said, however, Wall states in his own work that much of the data recorded from the era he had researched wasn’t ***sound***, and therefore it was ***impossible*** to make a claim about why the numbers had changed. He was also having to make assumptions for why certain things played out the way they did when the surviving data was “too scattered both geographically and over time” (p. 160), which led me to assume that perhaps this is a common problem for many historians who rely entirely on quantification. In my opinion, this piece of writing does a great job of showing both the ***advances*** that Quantitative History has brought to the table in the field of history, but also shows some of its ***limitations*** as well.  
