Kelley discusses the sources that Medieval historians used in their accounts, “*either the historian himself was an eyewitness or else he made use of the best authorities … first hand perception and authority derived from a single human source was the guarantor of authentic history.*” (pg 122).  This method of gathering information is similar to classical historical writing. In his approach Herodotus’s history was based on *eyewitness testimony or hearsay*. (pg 21).  In this way, Medieval Christian historical writing keeps its ties with the methodology of antiquity.  However there are major differences that develop concerning approaches to causality with Christian historical writing.  In older historical texts factors of causality are often approached with human elements in mind, less attention is spent on the supernatural influences that may have shaped an event.  However, Medieval historical writing focuses less on explaining the causes of events and presents them with more attention towards spiritual meaning.  Kelley writes, “*it (history) often tended towards randomness, not having any sense of relevance other than the ‘grand design of God.’*” (pg 120). If a historian’s interpretation of how an event took place shapes the way that they understand it in hindsight, then which approach, religious or social/political, provides a more accurate representation?  Does being ‘accurate’ to events as they actually happened matter, or is this interpretation of events by contemporaries more meaningful?

Kelley describes history in the Medieval context as “*stressing truth, utility, and, secondarily, aesthetic or literary value, but all of these classical qualities were reinterpreted in the context of Christian faith, piety, doctrine, and the different attitudes toward what was ‘worth remembering.’*” (pg 101).  It seems that this description of history could fit with any time, as history stresses truth and utility, but the meaning of *truth* or *utility* is reinterpreted within a specific cultural context. Even with consistent goals for history, *like truth and utility*, the context in which history is written and read changes meaning and emphasis.  Kelley mentions historians looking back to the barbarian past and then Christianizing it.  Likewise, as empiricists, modern historians often look back at Medieval Christian histories and reinterpret them empirically, getting an entirely different meaning from the original intention of the writer.
