  For the most part (maybe with the exception of the Marxist History section) most of the historiographical methodologies we have read about and discussed up to this point have been primarily concerned primarily (though not entirely) with documentation and analysis of political history in some form. The obvious reason for and value of the centrality of political history is that political forces steer, shape, form, and discuss the direction and fates of nations and civilizations. The Annales practice of history introduces the notion of **“total history”** (p.88) that includes broad, emotional narrative that discusses not only political history but economic and cultural history as well and places significant emphasis on the importance of the interaction of these various forms of historical deliberation. Though the Annales approach has gone through several methodological shifts throughout its existence it has remained **“ferociously and aggressively global in scope.”**

  Fernand Braudel’s examination of the contrast between the development of ‘highland civilizations’ and ‘lowland civilizations’ in The Mediterranean uniquely subscribes to the methodological practices espoused to the Annales approach to doing history. He discusses the feudal system as a **political, social, and economic structure** that drives and shapes the mentality and relationships of people under its practice and how it effects the civilizations of highland and lowland regions at different rates, levels of intensity, and depth. That is, the degree to which highland civilizations subscribe to the feudal way of life versus that of lowland civilizations. 

  As Braudel’s argument develops into one of **“geographic determinism”** it seems to lose a great deal of its logical consistency. At first he sets up a comparison between the levels of “contact” between highland and lowland communities in the Mediterranean region versus those of the Orient. During his discussion of the mountains’ resources though his prose (at least in my assessment) becomes highly discontinuous. He spends the first section of his argument constructing a sharp contrast between mountains and plains but goes on to say things like “the mountains are a kind of extension of the plain.” Braudel does ultimately clarify his position on the seeming inconsistencies in his narrative and sums them up saying, about the mountains, that “life there is possible, not easy.” Ultimately his argument is a geographically deterministic but methodologically inclusive testament to the necessity of examining the relationships between different and relatively isolated communities or civilizations and their inevitable resource based interdependency. 

  At times the inclusivity of different disciplinary approaches to history ascribed to the Annales practice is shrouded by the dense deterministic prose in Braudel’s work. The broadness of the scope of the Annales approach makes it a remarkably **holistic tool for examining relationships** at the level of populations but it makes it difficult to relate to as an individual.
	
