The Annals were, in some ways, a reaction or sub-set of empiricism. The Annals reacted to Empiricisms emphasis on the political with an emphasis on encompassing other factors; geography and culture were emphasized, as well as sociology and mentality. Where Empricism was criticized for being arbitrary, the Annales responded with an emphasis on data, computers, and statistics. In short, the Annales should be viewed as a rebellious son of the empiricist movement, not its own beast arising out of the depths. 

Or perhaps that is too extreme. Regardless, their emphasis on “the whole history” sought to correct the failings of conventional Empiricism, while also, in practice exemplifying them. The goals of The Annals were frankly impossible; one can never encompass everything, and the attempt is either hubris or mania. However they nonetheless contributed a valuable perspective and analysis to the field. The Mediterranean showcases how these authors’ utilized geography and data, complete with enough footnotes to, at times, dwarf the text, to form a coherent narrative of the peoples dealt with. 

Yet this narrative still relies on the assumption that it *emerges fully formed* from the evidence itself; that all of this evidence has a purpose and point, that it encompasses the *true* history. And perhaps it can! Perhaps the methods have purpose. But if so, they are only different from those of the empiricists in their emphasis on numbers, statistics, and geography, rather than less “reliable” sources. They do not have a final solution to any of the epistemological questions plaguing the field. Its analysis is still an analysis, subject to rational skepticism and the general claim of unsupported conclusions, and at times overly deterministic in its outlook.

If anything, overly deterministic describes the main failing of the method. When using sociological methods the method overemphasized sociology, when using geographical methods it appears to state that everything flows from simple geography, and when using datasets and statistics it can make similarly overvalued conclusions based on isolated events. The enclosed Mediterranean excerpt exemplifies the second failing, which means it is very much indicative of the general field. The first and third can be seen with something even Green and Troup take for granted; Goubert, an example of the field, argued that female fertility rates, being regional, showed religious sexual ethics. The basis of his analysis may be quantified, yet the connection between this data and the mindset of a European women is severely suspect. So many other factors could muddle causation that forming a clear link based on any correlation between those factors, no matter how strong, is almost absurd. Even if I am misunderstanding the particulars, not having read Goubert first hand, the larger problem seems valid.
