The *Annales* are perhaps the middle ground between a chronicler of facts and a historian. Since they rely heavily on large amounts of data, and they use this data to explain why history happened in a geographical sense rather than a humanist sense. They are of course innovative, in the fact that they at least attempted a “total history”. Yes, they failed miserably, because it’s just not possible to gather that much information in a text for human consumption. That is however beside the point, because they were trying to tell the history of the Mediterranean in as true a sense as they could, mainly through geography. The Annales tried to gather a truer history that relied on objective data, and drew their conclusions from that. Which is more objective than most historical writings that may rely more heavily of conjecture and assumption. The biggest reason the *Annales* were so important is because they tried to write a bigger history, a history that relied on more of the human sciences than previous historiographical attempts. 

*The Annales* may have been more objective in their approach to history, but they in my opinion were more chronicler than historian. Their reliance on data is what sets them apart. Their writings read more like an anthropological report rather than a narrative, which is what history is. These writings may be considered more scientific than most, and that is perhaps what makes them more objective and truthful. The problem solving that we see amongst the “quantitative historians” is a more scientific approach to history, because they are literally solving a problem rather than writing a narrative. So, it is in my opinion that the *Annales* are a more objective and scientific branch of historiography. 

The biggest problems with this branch of Historiography in my opinion, is that it can easily become be-humanized. History has been relatively humanistic in its approach to doing history. So with the *Annales*, it should be used in gathering the facts of what happened, and perhaps be used as a tool to tell the narrative rather than being the core of the writing. In the excerpt from Fernand Braudel we see that the writing is **filled** with explanation, and seems more like a report rather than a historical writing. However, since one of historiography’s main goals is to be more objective and scientific in its approach, then this type of historiography writing makes sense. Maybe with the *Annales* we can gain another approach to doing history that can aid in the search for objectivity and truth that historians wish for.   
