The Annales approach to writing history was a movement away from the focus on political and military history that had been so prevalent.  Instead of focusing only on the political aspects of society, the idea of writing a ‘total history’ was important during the beginning of the the Annales approach.  However, as the Annales school developed this focus seemed to shift in focus towards things that could be quantified.  An important part of studying history was to identify important causal factors, or to identify and describe the overarching structures that govern society.  

For Braudel, geography was one of the overarching structures which affected the way that society functions.  He begins his work by identifying this theme and then goes into detail in explaining the impacts that it has on several aspects of society.  Braudel discusses mountains and the impact they have on various parts of society because of their nature as ‘both a barrier and a refuge,’ for example he explains that *“The feudal system as a political, economic, and social system, and as an instrument of justice failed to catch in it’s toils most of the mountain regions and those it did reach it only partially influenced.”* (pg 98).

Unlike some of the types of history we’ve looked at so far, this approach looks almost exclusively at the bigger picture.  It leaves out the specific and the individual except when to use as examples to demonstrate the themes.  For example, Braudel mentions the people living in the Sabine hills (pg 105), and he does this in order to illustrate the cultural barrier that is precipitated by the physical barrier of mountains.  In theory, this focus should give a better understanding of history as a whole and of the recurring themes and causalities of history.  In Braudel’s work, however, this approach seems to detract from the actual ‘facts’ of history and instead Braudel gives wide statements that seem detached from any specific historical time or space.  Without this specific context it is hard to find concrete meaning in his ideas.
