  The Annales’ school is a 20th century group of historians that began by challenging the overwhelming focus on political and diplomatic topics that had taken over French history and “imposed a dialogue with the sister disciples,” and sought to **“break down the boundaries between the human sciences…incorporating as many of these disciplines as possible.”**(p87). The term school is meant more figuratively than literally in that the Annales describes a group of historians performing a specific methodology in their profession. The con to this approach is that a research area that is too broad leaves the chance that none of the variables get the attention it deserves. The pro is that the broad range, if performed adequately, paints a more complete picture of the history and allows the reader to draw many of their own original conclusions. 

  In the late 1940s through the early 1950s the school, initiated by Fernand Braudel, **“introduced a mutli-layered historical chronology, and initiated a strong focus on quantitative history.”**(p87).  Braudel codified this methodology in his publication La Mediterranee et le monde Mediterraneen a l’epoque de Philippe II and expressed his theory of time within a metaphor of an ocean with three historical layers each moving at a different speed and focused on different aspects of history, the longue duree, medium duree, and histoire evenementielle. Braudel’s immediate successors such as Ernest Labrousse, Goubert and Duby seized on his statistical emphasis and built upon it with the advent of computers. So far we have not seen much of a focus on quantitative methods concerning history - - they have came up before (in the science of history, for example) but not with the same vigor of Braudel. The drawback to this methodology is that too much focus can be paid attention to statistical data, leaving out other important aspects. However, if a historian adheres to the “first generation’s” dedication to incorporating many different disciplines, this drawback may be countered. The advantage to this method is that often quantitative measures are left out of history and including them adds another dimension to a history. 

  From the early 1970’s until now, the historians of the Annales—labeled as the “third generation”- brought an added focus to the **mentalities**, or the mental structures of history. When I read about the Annales “third generation’s” emphasis on the mentalities I immediately thought back to humanism and the similar historiographical focus. As with humanism, the downside to this method is that much of it is relative and it leaves a lot of room for interpretation, which leaves room for possible errors on the part of the historian that could improperly influence the reader. 

  In La Mediterranee et le monde Mediterraneen a l’epoque de Philippe II Braudel does an excellent job of adhering to the “first generation’ss” tenants of historiography and utilizes a multi-disciple approach throughout. Braudel also grounds his assertions with ample evidence, lending to his credibility and allowing the reader to see where he drew his conclusions. While Braudel does make note of a fair amount of quantitative data, with the introduction I expected a much greater highlighting of statistical information. That said, ultimately I believe Braudel held true to the Annales school of thought and process of historiography. 
