What I gathered from this chapter is that the *Annales* is a group of historians who are associated with a type of historiography that was developed by two French historians during the early 20th century. Their main focus was more on social/cultural themes, rather than political ones. These two French historians, ***Febvre*** and ***Bloch***, created the idea of ***total history***, and argued that “all aspects of society were part of historical reality” (p. 88). ***Braudel***, another important French historian and contributor to the *Annales*, placed importance on events and people “as the agents of history” (p. 90).  

Although Braudel’s work in *The Mediterranean* was greatly admired for the wealth of details he provided, it was also heavily criticized. Understandably, many people thought that the idea of ***total history*** was ***unachievable***, and also that Braudel was giving detail to areas that he couldn’t possibly know everything about (p. 90). Setting those two issues aside, however, through his work, Braudel was able to launch history into one of the most sought out areas of study in French academics, and helped to “set new trends in historical thinking and methodology” (pp. 90-91). 

Something else that the chapter mentions is the study of ***mentalités***, which focused on people’s lives and their experiences. The study of ***mentalités*** is often times seen as the *Annales* way of addressing the ***objective-subjective*** issue that all historians constantly battle with (p. 92). It was also interesting to read that many *Annales* methods have been well-applied to pre-industrial societies, but it has proved to be a struggle with modern-day society, as things are constantly changing at a very quick pace (p. 93).

It is mentioned in the description before the reading that Braudel wrote in a way that would “transport” his readers to the area he was writing about, and that it was clear that he loved that area (the Mediterranean) very deeply (p. 90). After actually reading the excerpt from his work, I found it interesting that he seems to be very ***conflicted*** by his love for the region that he is writing about, and also trying to give a total history of it. This comes across in the descriptions of the various mountain ranges that he brings up, which he describes in almost a romantic way. Then he throws in some numbers about the heights of said mountains to try to balance it all out again. The language that he uses may not be as rich as something you would read in a classic literature book, but for me, it was easy to understand that Braudel really was passionate about the Mediterranean. Braudel also seems to be ***sympathetic*** towards the mountain dwellers, essentially stating that they are nasty people who get made fun of all the time by those in the towns below, but that without the mountain people, the town wouldn’t be able to thrive (p. 107). Therefore, I do believe that the description and the actual excerpt jive well together, because it is evident that Braudel did put an emphasis on the lives and experiences of the mountain dwellers, while at the same time giving some important numbers that help contribute to the total history part. However, it is obvious that full ***objectiveness*** still seems to present itself as an issue, even for the *Annales*.   
