The *Annales* way of history was interesting to think about even though I did not agree with their method. It seems that they pretty much **rejected** every method that was previously used. *"It was the Annales itself that over the years undermined the positivist definition of historical fact, destroyed the taboo on unwritten evidence, imposed a dialogue with the sister disciplines, discredited the history of events, rejected the primacy of political history by insisting on its interaction with economic and cultural history, repudiated traditional biography which isolated the individual, and succeeded, finally in making 'sensibility' or modes of feeling the object of serious historical research"* (p. 87). I will admit that I was pretty confused on what was their contribution to history because by taking all of this away, I thought their history was nonsense. But reading further in the chapter I was able to see that they did make contributions such as a **problem-solving approach** and **total history**. I was really confused on the *metaphor of the ocean* that Braudel used. But to be honest, I was confused with Braudel the whole time. His writing was done well; it was picturesque but sometimes I did not understand his point. I’m thinking that maybe his movie quote threw me off. The authors of the book mentioned that this has made historians uneasy (p. 94). Which I do not blame them because I thought that it was rather odd but then again the *Annales* are known as rejected the *old* ways of history.

This question made me question the *_correctness_* of history. As I already mentioned, the *Annales* got rid of a lot of the previous methods of writing history. Do we think this was okay? I think in a large way historiographers have always done this; rejected some previous method of doing historiography. The thing is I think the *Annales* did this more drastically and rejected what seems was a foundation in history such as written evidence and history of events. These changes were a big deal and had a lot of critics. Do we feel that there is a *correct* way of doing history? If so, what is the *correct* way? 
