This section dealing with Roman style history left me with the conclusion that althought Roman history is central to the development of Western thought, the Romans themselves who seem to be recording these histories are doing so in a contradictive manner.

To begin, this chapter repeatedly deals with Roman obsession with the past, or more importantly the "origin". The Romans strive to continue to modernize the world around them in a precise manner, believing that the modern world is somehow more understanding than the origins of their civilization, but at the same time continuing to have obessession with the origin due to its so-called purity. It is in this way that Roman historical thought becomes distorted, how can the modern period be classified as the best and most understanding period to date, while the origin is seen as the ultimate goal for society to reach as it is more structurally pure.

In the case of Roman Historiography, truth is simply a manner of perspective. This section begins by describing the Romans as trying to distinguish themselves as separate from Greek thought, and while also deeming themselves victims of poor historical framing. As the class had already discussed in weeks prior, history is how some people not only define their existance, but how people justify the past and their own existance. It is in this way that historical framing becomes so important. This section will lead you to believe that the Romans are actually victims or poor historical framing which leads to their achievements being seen as lesser when they should actually be the greater of the two when compared to Greek histories. What I find contradictive about this section in particular is that while the Romans continually classify themselves as non mystics, and closer to set in stone facts, the core thinkers of Roman Historical thought all take insight from their Greek mystic neighbors continuing this outdated trend of clinging to the Origins of thought while also claiming to modernize and separate from the Greeks.

