**America in the World** 
The Historiography of American Foreign Relations Since 1941

So, this book is a hell of a lot longer and denser than my initial assessment of it determined…but it offers a unique and diverse look into the historiographical approaches to a complex and highly contested span of American history…American foreign relations between 1941 and 1995 (when the book was first published). It consists of the scholarly writings of various students of the indicated time period that have been compiled by the editor of the book and analyzed and contextualized in the larger scheme of the process of historiographical methodology.

I intend to have the book completely read no later than this coming Friday, 18 November 2016. (I read the first 230ish pages of it in one sitting and almost had to go to the hospital). **Update**: I finished the damn thing last night. Yuck. 

I’ll have a rough draft of the script from which I will read completed no later than the Sunday following that, 20 November 2016. I plan to spend about 4 hours working on this on Thursday 17 November 2016 ( and Ill probably spend no more than 2 hours toying with video ideas on that day also. I really like the idea of following in the style of “Drunk History” (if you haven’t seen it I highly recommend it, not only is it educational and relatable, but it hakes thinking about history fun.) I am still toying with the idea of how to apply this to historiography versus history in general but I’m sure a few beers will help me sort that out.

As far as imagery/ graphics go I’m not sure what I want to use yet, I have a vague idea but I’m not quite ready to share it because I’m not sure my idea is quite concrete enough at this point to nail anything sensible to the wall. In short there will be a lot of romanticized 1980’s reminiscent spy motifs and cold war era stereotypically divisive east vs west imagery. With these general guidelines in mind I plan on collecting and applying and trying out the various things in intend to use no later than the same day as having my script finished; so I can spend the next 4-5 days assembling my video, editing my audio recordings, and making the two match up and make sense. I'm going to spend a couple of hours on the morning of Saturday 19 November actually gathering images, video clips, etc and playing with how to arrange them in a way that sufficiently represents my vision for this project. 

I expect there will be very little (if any) actual footage of me in the actual final copy of the video. If there is any I expect I will be sitting in an armchair with a glass of bourbon in my hand and some academic looking book in my hand (with my script inside it) maybe in a bathrobe…narrating some particular facet of the book; perhaps I will use this as a way to introduce the book. I haven’t decided yet. 

Seriously, check out “drunk history” on youtube…it may not be an academically reputable source but its certainly interesting, humorous, and engaging, which is what I would like my video to be. 
