In the Reformation Traditions chapter, Kelly delves into the Reformation period following the Renaissance, and describes the historiographical shifts associated with the religious wars.  His description of each nation’s “national tradition” ties into the previously discussed theme of ethnocentrism in historiography, the tendencies of a given culture to focus inward when writing its own history.  This was most evident in the case of Rome, whereby all Roman history and chronologies held Rome at the center, and everything else was secondary.  Kelley placed this into context with the historical traditions of medieval societies, in which every nation’s own historians and chroniclers were focused on establishing the historical foundation of their own nation, and giving credence to its cultural roots.  In this chapter, however, what he describes is a return of the centrality of Rome into historiography, and the rebirth of classical Roman themes.  During this period, according to Kelley, each nation sought to legitimize itself by tying its history back to the Roman Empire, and connecting its cultural roots as far into classical civilization as possible.  This lies in sharp contrast to Kelly’s earlier point about everything in classical records being essentially “all about Rome,” and overlooking the significance of the “barbarians,” followed by those same barbarians becoming more historically prominent after the fall of Rome.  Now, ironically, the nations which were descended from those barbarian peoples were attempting to connect themselves back to Rome, in order to give themselves greater significance. Kelley continues along a trend of tying everything back to Rome, while highlighting the back-and-forth nature of historiographical focus from Rome itself to everything else, and back again.
