The reformation period truely shows radical ideas about truth, and also attempts to redefine historiography to new meaningful ends. On one hand you have internal reformation of religious sects starting within the Catholic church. As the Catholic church begins to divide itself into Protestants, Calvin's, and Lutherans, each sect begins to redefine its historical and divine significance using "human histories" to further define divine understanding. For as it has been stated before in the book, the study of human histories is essentially useless unless you are using them to greater understand the divine workings of god.

The unseen transformation of historiography starts with the reformations drive of finding religious truths that are provable through such things as human histories. As it is seen in many forms of christianity, the greatest truths seem to lie as close to the time of the prophets as possible, for this seems like the most direct source to finding truth. This need to discover primary sources closest to the original source would not only change the separate sects of an evolving religion(Christianity), but also fuel the change of historiography from ecclesiastical knowledge, to first hand knowledge.

As these religious thinkers begin to break down the true meaning of gods nature through human histories, they are doing so again without any real intrigue to the history as it pertains to human betterment. They are doing it soley to give truth to the world around them in the most religious sense. At the same time however, these reformists of religion such as Jean Crespin and John Foxe are also unknowingly advancing the science and art of historiography. It is at this point that you see the workings of these figures taking on deeper research into the lives of Christians using essentially primary sources that do not come from religious text.(171-72)
