<b> Faces of History</b><br>
<i>Discussion Guide</i><br>
Pg. 162-187<br><br>
So, Sleidan is my favorite dude so far. He is clearly the most <b>conflicted historian</b> we’ve read about. At least as I’m writing this I think that (I’m also writing while reading so I’m not sure how the chapter ends). Maybe the reformation was a wild time. Anyway, he ends up “apologizing” for his Histories. Seems strange. But then he writes “I would rather die than say, still less write, anything without proof” (169). Wait what? He apologized for causing a scene then he says <b>HE’D RATHER DIE</b> than write without proof. The guy also seems to be really interested in people who wrote in times of <b>tragedy</b>.<br><br><b> <i>Why does war (crisis) rule history?</i></b><br><br> Seems like most history is a struggle or rise of some sort; it’s never rainbows and butterflies. Like just thinking about the most popular history book (the Bible for those of you who didn’t know) … Adam and Eve are chillin’ out in the garden … the snake comes … and BAM Cain kills Able. So it goes. The rest is a bloody mess.<br><br>

So, I wanted to ask a question about all of the nation traditions. I had trouble figuring out which one to isolate… so I figure I would just broadly ask <b>why were the nations so driven about finding their truest roots?</b> (Whatever that really means). It seems everyone is pissed off at the Romans by now, so they are attaching themselves to the barbarians. Kind of an backwards way compared to the Roman tradition of this is Roman so it’s good. 
