
The chapter on Marxist historians describes the method of writing “history from below,” meaning from the point of view of the common people, rather than what Karl Marx himself would call the ‘dominant class.’  This rather unique approach has both its advantages and its pitfalls.  On the one hand, it challenges the tradition of history “being written by the winners,” in which the establishment and/or whoever is in control gets to decide what goes into the history books, and what will be omitted.  As the chapter points out, Marx believed that the economic structure of a given society dictated how it functioned as one, and consequently, how its history would unfold. (p. 35) He also argued that every socioeconomic system consisted of a labor force being exploited by the upper class, and that, once they became aware of their exploitation, the working class would rebel and overthrow the upper class, establishing a more advanced system, first to feudalism, then to capitalism, and so on.  His approach to history focused on basic human life, and the requirements thereof, which certainly has it merits.  Instead of obsessing over the larger picture, with the rise and fall of empires, and the grand scheme of the world, Marx takes a closer look at humanity on a smaller and simpler scale.  However, this kind of method of viewing human history is rather narrow-minded, and places emphasis only on domestic issues within a society.  Marxist historians would have had (and probably did have) their hands full addressing the Great Depression, but would have provided little historical insight on things like the Cold War, or the creation of the United Nations, for instance.  Marxist historians provide a look at how human societies function at the most basic, fundamental levels, but their methods are flawed in that they obsess over the socioeconomic aspects of society and little else.  Karl Marx may have argued that the bulk of human history can be summed up by saying that “the proletariat will overthrow the bourgeoisies,” but most historians will tell you there is much more to it than that.  
