The selections from Houses this week gave us some background on empiricist and Marxist historians. Even from my initial reading of the Marxist chapter, I can clearly see how Marxist historians have had tremendous impact on the field of modern history. On page 33 the author quotes Marwick as saying that the main distinguishing characteristic of contemporary historians is “an interest in ordinary people as such,” and then goes on to highlight how class struggle has been the center of the Marxist historical process. Although current trends in history and historiography do focus on both broad-picture and narrowly defined topics, the attention to minute detail when writing about ordinary, everyday subjects has increased. You can find a history written about anyone you could ever want to read about, a history that you can relate to your own experiences, even if for just a moment. 

Perhaps this has something to do with the continued focus on novel ideas in scholarship. When you apply to study for a PhD, especially in a social science (such as archaeology), there’s an expectation that your dissertation will be about a novel discovery. It can be minute, but it must be novel – no one else should have known what kind of incense was burned at the base of Guatemalan pyramids, why certain pieces of chert were better for scraping hides than others, or why some bones end up in the garbage. In the grand scheme of things, it doesn’t matter why you discovered these things, only that they are new and shiny and different than what someone else may have written about. I guess the objective of contributing to the collective body of knowledge in some way, shape or form is somehow more important than learning for learning’s sake.

In a lot of ways this shift to Marxist thought indicates that history is no longer solely about learning about human nature, or struggle, or the powerful, or empires that span centuries and subject millions. It is certainly those things, but it is also about the grandmother who was a secret Cuban revolutionary, the housecleaner in a New York hotel, or why women wore leotards when working out in the 1970s. It’s about capturing a feeling or a moment, telling a story no matter how insignificant, and hoping that one person relates or perhaps draws inspiration. This shift seems to indicate that all stories have some kind of intrinsic value, even if it is only in novelty.
