
Karl Marx is described as the most influential historical theorist of the twentieth century.  It should come as no surprise that the center of Marxist history is class struggle, economics and the relationship to the means of production. “Historical Materialism” posits that all social structures and changes in society spring from human material needs and accesses to fulfill these needs. 
     
The Marxist examination of history in the broadest category is “History from Below.” Or “people’s history”.  This is a significant change from the histories we have studied thus far that have focused on the actions of the elite in each society. We have seen in histories that we have studies so far the impact that the actions of elites can have on the rest of society. Though we have yet to see history that examines how the actions of the majority of the population can affect the elites. 
     
One obvious problem with Marxist history is the “revolution of the proletariat” has not happened yet. However, based on Marxist epochs this would be the next historical evolution. Perhaps it could be argued that if enough of the population’s material needs are met than the proletariat will never need a revolution against the bourgeois. Another question that Marxist history begs is if social class and economics provide too narrow a focus to accurately judge historical events. One also wonders if Marxist historical analysis is appropriate to judge societies before capitalism. Is it possible for Marxist thought to be applied to study non-sedentary societies?

Exploitation by E.P. Thompson from “The Making of the English Working Class” shows an interesting change in society due to the advent of manufacturing. The hostility in which the working class of the factory were described shows an increase in class tension and hostility brought about by the change in the means of production. Another interesting point in the reading is the diversity of the working class into “working classes.” The working class can be artisans, small business owners, tradesmen and other similar workers. It was not just the outcome of the industrial revolution. “The working class made itself as much as it was made.” (49) 
    

