Romans are important to history because they were the model for the different eras that followed them. The Roman Empire produced two of the major historians with the rise and fall of the empire and the two men were Livy and Tacitus. Livy and his writings would become the ground the groundwork for many historians to come. Rhetoric was very important because the people followed Caesar and the Senate. Roman rhetoric would become the standard for all governments throughout the course of history.

The start of the Roman Empire was with the city itself. Livy who is considered one of the founder fathers of history and along with all other Romans agreed that their history started with the formation of Rome. Livy watched parts of Rome being built. The reason for this is that Romans measure time with the start of Rome and not before. The events that took place before the power of Rome was completed are recorded, but not considered that start of the Roman history. It is not considered the start of their history because the build up to the full power of Rome was not in full effect at the time. Rome was under the rule of a monarchy and the republic or as Livy called it "new liberty" (Kelly, pg. 58) took control and started a better Rome. When the Roman Empire was in full swing of command and conquer with expansion as the priority.

The saying "all roads lead to Rome" is very important because no matter where a person was in the empire, Rome was always the true center in their hearts. This was the ideal for all Romans that are from Rome and have ties to the city. Romans that are from the city are the one that hold some type of office or status moved away from Rome and put in charge of an area. The Roman military experienced on a regular basis with traveling back a forth to forts or camps for an expended time. The Romans took what is now Europe and made sure that Rome was the heart of the empire even though the city was not in the center. It is also a truth for the ages because hints of the Roman Empire are taken by every era and transformed what Romans did to restart. One the roads that lead to Rome is the road to religion. The Vatican and the Pope are in Rome and have been for a long time. St. Peter’s Basilica that stands today replaced the Old St. Peters Basilica that stood in the same place and began construction in the early 14th century and finished in the early to mid 15th century. The Vatican can be said to be one of the safest places on earth because The Vatican is surrounded by the city of Rome its self. It is protected and was built that way for the reason that it is the center and the heart of Christianity.

Rhetoric is "the art or skill of speaking or writing formally and effectively especially as a way to persuade or influence people" (Merriam-Webster.com). It can be said that Roman rhetoric had a major influence on the rest of the world after the fall of Rome. Being able to change the past and one countries history is what the Romans started. The Romans were very good with rhetoric. It could be said that it started with underground while the monarchy rule was in power before the rise of the republic. All Caesars, the senate members, and historians used rhetoric like Livy and Cicero shaped the minds of many Romans. Caesar and members of the senate use rhetoric to speak to the people and soldiers of Rome for many reasons. For example, when Rome wanted to expand, Caesar would give a speech to get the people on the side of him and Rome with very motivational and powerful words to show how much he and senate wanted to enlarge the empire.

(Cicero and rhetoric)

The other side of rhetoric is writing. Kelly tells us the "first law" (Kelly, pg. 66) is to tell the truth no matter what. Livy and Tacitus both wrote the history they lived. Livy wrote history during the monarchy and the new republic. This was important because the history changed in front of Livy and he wrote about because it was an important event, but it was not considered part of the republic history except the overthrow. Tacitus followed Livy later on down the road, and wrote about the later history of Rome. Tacitus was a politician and a military officer that wrote about what he lived and experienced. He was the major historian for the decline and fall of Rome, as Livy was the major historian for the Rise of Rome. The historian’s job is to tell the whole truth and Livy and Tacitus are two historians that did that job well. Livy told his stories and wrote so well that the Medieval and Renaissance eras look back to his work and use his methods as the reference to future work.
