From the scrolls of ancient Greece to the jargon packed books of the modern academic historian, we search for what was truthful to us. In studying what makes up history, we must focus on some various changing themes through what we would call today historiography. Historiography focuses on these main themes that form the modern academic discipline: Source criticism, fact vs. truth, impartiality, scholarship, critical understanding, and secularism. From ancient times to the modern day, the “truth” has changed significantly, and this is how. 

The ancient Greeks are the fathers of history, and two Greeks in particular: Herodotus, and Thucydides laid the foundations for us. These great men began to look at sources in a more critical way, and differentiated between what we would call primary and secondary sources. For Herodotus, the father of history, “history depended on the one of two criteria, that is to be based on testimony that was either eyewitness (opsis) or hearsay (akoe). Thucydides didn’t concern himself with hearsay, and was our founder of a more political history. Thucydides relied on telling the story of states in conflict, and was more critical in his telling of history than Herodotus. During this period, western civilization still relied on the myth-histories of Homer and other Greek poets to lay the foundations of creation in the eyes of the Greeks. So, ironically the Greeks were both critical of the events of the past, and yet relied on the myths of their ancestors to begin their stories of history. Finally, the Greeks begin our long journey that is the search for truth. These men inspired another Greek, Polybius, a historian who began the journey for us towards truth. For the Greeks, “to be a good historian, however, involved more than just being a good man or a good citizen, for it required that he be prepared to tell the truth at all costs, to the extent of accusing a friend or praising an enemy.” So, as we praise the Greeks in many things within the Western world, we again must praise them for being a people who started for us, the journey toward truth. 
  
Medieval Europe, is more important for our discipline of history than you would think. Other than their attempts at savings manuscripts of the past, they further our journey towards truth and laid the foundations of what would one day become secular history. Although the origins of the states of the barbarian nations of Europe were in myth, they were the beginnings of secular history antithetical to the universal religious history of the Catholic Church. In medieval Europe we see the start of a distinction between chroniclers, compilers of facts and data, and the historian, the one whom finds the meaning behind historical events. A good way to distinguish is for chroniclers, they tell us what happened, and historians tell us why it happened. We also begin to see the beginning of the end for myth-histories near the end of this period, being in contrast to the beginning of the period. The tales of King Arthur were made historical by Geoffrey of Monmouth, but were immediately assailed by the historians of the day, and his work was label as fiction. This is the foundations for scholarship as we know it in the west, and historians became more critical of one another’s work. Although this scholarship still lacked a formal academic discipline, these actions by medieval historians laid the foundations of scholarship for later renaissance and enlightenment historians. The medieval age may not have been the most stable or prosperous, but they aided history in its travel through time in search of truth. 
  
The key event to history’s search for truth, is as we know, the Enlightenment. The Enlightenment created a formal methodology that allowed for more impartiality and truth to be found in historical writings. The key to allowing this, is the amount of source criticism that was being used by the historians of the Enlightenment. They worked to reveal forgeries of the past, consulted many authors of the past on a particular subject, and began to create a formal methodology aimed towards universals rather than particulars. The secularization and codification of history were critical to the creation of an academic discipline that would become history. To codify history is to know “not only what is said, but also by whom it is said, with what words it is said, in what time, on what occasion, what precedes, and what follows.”. This codification would be critical to the methodology of history, since reliance on credible sources is essential. The secularization of history is what allowed history to finally become a real academic discipline. The removal of church influence allowed history to be more impartial and search for a truth that did contradict the teachings of the Church, because the historians’ methods gave legitimacy to their work. With these pillars of history being raised, we can finally get to the scholarship that makes history a true academic discipline. The Republic of Letters as it was called, began a more comprehensive discussion between historians of different educational traditions. The Republic of Letter, “in which information and ideas were exchanged, circles, societies, and academies were formed, libraries were opened to researchers, bibliographies and encyclopedias were published, and scholars broadened their horizons directly by more or less institutionalized international voyages, the itinera italicum, and germanicum. This “republic” is what allowed for discussion between Italians, French, German, and British historians to begin the academic discipline. Their work for a true academic history, is what gave us the history discipline of today, with much improvements being made between then and now. 
