##Europe Pre-Reformation 
	
Prior to the Reformation, Europe was controlled by the duality of the church and the state.  Such a dual construction of society, can be visualized by the Gelasian concept of the “two swords”.   Essentially the idea was that there were “two swords”, the church and state, which competed for superior authority.  Said competition would ultimately shape Europe.  Both entities were strict hierarchies that maintained control through the low literacy rate which meant that many individuals were uneducated.  Additionally controlled was sustained through deep seeded tradition.  That is to say a feeling that there also was and also would be a hierarchical system.  
	
While the church and state were challenged each other to maintain ultimate authority, there wasn’t much if any dissent within the church.  Europe’s population was largely Roman Catholic, which meant the church’s history was Roman Catholic.  There certainly were other religions within Europe, but these religions were minority religions and subject to heavy persecution from the Roman Catholic church.  As the Reformation begins however this will change.  Protestant religions such a Lutheranism and Calvinism began to emerge and would present their own histories which competed directly with the Roman Catholic church and indirectly with the state.

##Reformation
	
The Reformation was a movement away from the Roman Catholic church due to a deep distrust in the church.  This distrust came from years of grievance with the Catholic church that largely revolved around access to information and corruption.  Martin Luther (1483-1546) and his 95 Thesis are often cited as the beginning of the Reformation.  In 1517 Luther was prompted to write his 95 Thesis based on his belief that the Catholic church was deeply corrupt.   Luther’s basic premise, which was basically the premise of the Reformation, was “every man a priest”, meaning that the established hierarchy in the church wasn’t necessary.  In fact the hierarchy of the Catholic church was seen as inherently wrong.  According to Catholic doctrine individuals must go through a priest to talk to God, however the Reformation stood for the proposition that every man could talk to God without a kind of middle man.  This undermines the hierarchy of the church and by extension the hierarchy of the state, which further called into question the church’s and state’s authority.

##Historiographical Effects of the Reformation 
	
The Reformation marked a “massive project of revisionism, which proposed, first implicitly and then explicitly, to rewrite universal history so that it would convict the Roman hierarchy and justify the ‘true religion’” (Kelley, 167).  This was the ultimate of effect of the Reformation on historiography.  Prior to the Reformation the hierarchy established by both the church and state was the foundation of all histories.  Histories were written by and for the elite.  All histories lead back to Rome and justified the Roman Catholic church.  The Reformation’s fundamental goal was to undermine and convict and the long standing tradition of Roman and Catholic centered histories.   
	
An extension of the revisionism undertook during the Reformation was a distrust for tradition, which became the grounds to criticize the Catholic church.  Such distrust was expressed by Dante who stated that “Those who rely solely on the tradition, therefore, must be thrown out of the arena”.   Everything within the church operated based off of known traditions that had been around for generations.  These traditions maintained the hierarchy and shaped histories.  Because most individuals were illiterate, histories were for the very elite in society such as the clergy.  Inevitably the intended audience generated histories that fit the elites  perception of the world.  The heaving influence of tradition on history, therefore was utilized to criticize not only the Pope but also the ecumenical council which was the chief rival to the pope’s authority.  Further the conflict between the pope and council represented a tear in the Catholic  church itself.  The council represented another Catholic tradition which according to Reformation writers created a kind of faction within the Catholic church between the pope and the council.  This faction represented the consequences of following tradition: discord that leads to failure.  

Another facet of tradition in Reformation history was human traditions.  Protestant history became a kind of conflict between “spirit and letter”.  That is to say history as the process of God’s Word and history as the product of human’s sin.  One Reformation historian Melanchthon said “there has been no tradition, pious though it be in appearance, which has not wrought great evil for Christianity”.  History was therefore often seen by Protestant historians as the degradation of the church.  The conflict between God’s history and human history will come into play later as Protestants try to constructs their origins.  
##Johann Sleidan (1506-1556)
	
Sleidan was hired by the German princes to be the historiographer of the Reformation.  His job was to discuss Luther in addition to the agenda and efforts of the Protestant party.  While he was devoutly committed to the Reformation, he was also convicted that political history played an important role in religious history.  The two were intimately connected and with out one the other couldn’t be fully explained.  In one of his books, Sleidan stated that “In the history of religion, I would not omit what concerned the civil government because they are interwoven with the other”.  In other words, religious history is a product of its time and to omit civil history is to omit part of what created religious history.  To report one or the other, would be simply reported only half of what happened.  
	 
Sleidan personally felt very convicted to recount a fair and equal telling of history.  A French historian by the name of Commynes wrote histories in which it was said that “in no way did her praise those of his own country or race, even kings who had raised him to high honor, unless it was true…, [and] everywhere he presented the facts in themselves”.  Sleidan sought to write these kinds of histories.  Histories in which he didn’t praise any particular person or event because of a personal connection.  Later in life Sleidan wrote a friend asserting “I would rather die than say, still less write, anything without proof”.  Sleidan’s commitment to recounting both religious and civil history, speaks to what he believed was historical “truth”.  Religious history according to Sleidan was the history of  human sin not the process of God’s Word.  Truth was unbiased in Sleidan’s view.  His dedication to the truth and impartial histories inevitably effected the way he wrote as he dealt with a changing society that exhibited a great deal of religious dissent.

##Origins 

As the Reformation began, Protestants had to construct their histories or origins.  While it may seem obvious to say that Protestant history began with the Reformation, Protestant historians of the time would disagree. Protestants traced their history back to the ancient times.  One such writer John Foxe stated that “we have the old actes and histories of auncient tyme to give testimonie with us…, to declare the same form, usage, and institution of this our Church reformed now, not to be the begynnyng of any new Churche of our owne, but to be the renewiyng of the old auncient Church of Christ”.  The notion that the Protestant church was simply the resurgence of a church that existed in ancient times became the manner in which Reformation histories legitimized Protestantism as the “true religion”. Martyrs also became a part of the rhetoric involving Protestant origins.  The belief that “The blood of the martyrs, is the seed of the church” was widely held.  In part the purpose of this was to show the deep roots of the Protestant faith, however there is a certain amount of accusation that accompanies the martyr argument.  Without really saying it, Protestant histories were saying that Catholics have been persecuting the “true religion” the whole time. Essentially the goal of Protestant history was to establish origins that legitimize the Protestant faith while simultaneously devaluing the Catholic faith.  Protestant historians wanted to establish their religion as the ultimate source of truth.
