This is a super rough- not edited draft

The enlightenment was a time of profound change in intellectual thought in the 17th and 18th centuries. The Thirty Years’ War, new scientific discoveries and the American and French Revolutions contributed to a transformation in the discourse of philosophers and historians.  The ideas of the Enlightenment changed the way that history was approached. The age of reason and logic was seen by some as the culmination and pinnacle of human development with earlier ages represented as infancy and adolescence of the human race. In his book “Faces of History” Donald R. Kelley says “"History remained philosophy teaching by example” (219) This conveys the ability of history to explain about human nature, reason and virtue through actual events. History was able to answer questions in a way that philosophy alone could not.
    
Due to the radical shift in perspective and new ideas that emerged during the Enlightenment some definitions of terms are required.  Reason, in the context of the Enlightenment, is the ability to use facts, methods and logic to gain knowledge about the world. It becomes more important in academic pursuits than imagination, passion and faith During this time reason comes to play a larger role in the study of history; "reasoned history" sought to find the underlying causes of events.  Why things happened became as much of an academic pursuit as what happened. Humanism is the belief that shaped thought during this time. It places humans and the belief in human goodness and achievement as supreme to divine beliefs. In humanism, Individuals are primary and the human race is compared to the individual. "Humanity is like individual members of the species" (Kelley, 217) Philology is the examination of the language and meaning behind the language of historical documents in a critical effort to examine the authenticity and original meaning of histories.  "The study of human speech especially as the vehicle of literature and as a field of study that sheds light on cultural history." (Miriam Webster Dictionary.) Academics believed that there are rights that inherently belong to humans and are part of the human condition.  We see the culmination of these beliefs in the French Revolution in 1789 with the rhetoric of inalienable rights IE life, liberty, property. The belief in these rights is described as natural law. Hobbes and Locke are considered founders of modern political philosophy, they debated about the social contract. Hobbes was an English philosopher who is known for his work Leviathan; Hobbes wrote Two Treatise on Government.  They argued that individuals gave up some freedoms and liberties in order to form societies and benefit from the order and protection that these societies provided. The state of nature is contrasted with civil society.
    
Giambattista Vico was born in 1668 in Naples Italy, in his work, “New Science” Vico described three ages of humanity, the divine, the heroic and the human. Although he was virtually unknown during his own time, later his work would be rediscovered and he would influence many historians of later ages. Vico believed that with imagination the historian allowed “the properly trained scholar to penetrate to the heart of this prehistorical darkness.” (Kelly, 234) Vico was fascinated with “the question of origins, and the pre-historical ages of myth, barbarism and a putative state of nature before civil society.” (Kelley, 224) Vico said that any nation who claimed origins that differed from the story in the bible suffered from the conceit of nations. Of utmost importance to Vico is “understanding this primitive stage of civilization in all cultures.” (224) 
    
Vico disagreed with Descartes who one of the most prominent philosophers of this time. Rene Descartes wrote “Discourse on the Method” in it he uses a form of reasoning where any idea that contains doubt is rejected as not representing the truth. Through this method of reasoning he comes to the conclusion “Cogito, ergo sum” I think, therefor I am. Vico, on the other hand, posits “I make, therefore I know.” Vico argues that people create their own understanding of truth. 
    
Vico was not alone in his study of ancient origins. The idea of origins during the enlightenment focuses on the state of nature and it is a topic of considerable debate. Scottish scholars tried “to project human behavior, and in particular language and religion, back into the state of nature and the animal condition of man” (Kelley, 234) Adam Ferguson, from the University of Edinburgh, disagreed with Hobbes and Locke, for whom the state of nature was conjecture. In his “Essay on the History of Civil Society” he believes that the state of nature can be reconstructed and studied. His focus was the explanation of civilization and human nature through a universal history.  Vico, in “universal law” argues that laws are a “turning point in history” as opposed to the “feral stage of history. 
   
Near the middle of the 18th century English historian Edward Gibbon published the comprehensive history of the Roman empire, “The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.” Gibbon sought to use the new historical paradigm of seeking the deeper meaning behind historical events to explain the “why”. He also wanted to explain the fall of the Roman empire through barbarians and “unenlightened attitudes” of the Roman Catholic church. Gibbons history of Rome is a great example of the use of philology in history. Kelley says “for Gibbon every sentence implied a judgement, every paragraph had symmetrical shape no matter how confusing or obscure the facts of the matter.” (231) Gibbon was criticized that his writing style “is not style in which you can tell the truth.” (231) Gibbons work was seen more as story that of truth seeking history. Gibbons used extensive notes in the text of his work. This shows the growing need in academic history of the importance and relevance of sources used. It is also a first example of citation in academic history. Gibbon also provides an example of another new introduction to history during the Enlightenment which is the inclusion of eastern histories within the context of western historical traditions.    
    
The republic of letters represents a significant shift in the access to academic discourse. The republic of letters was an international system of scholarship and criticism that spread the new ides through society. Scholars and philosophers sent letters, papers, and pamphlets to each other for discourse and debate on the important topics of the day. This enabled more accesses to the new ideas and debates of this time period. Scholars could share ideas that were not easily shared in early time periods because of linguistic and geographic constraints. I would like to talk about the access to books during this time but need more research. Which I haven’t done yet because I’ve been lazy!!! Encyclopedias could me included here as well!!? Maybe
   
French historians of the Enlightenment believed that the study of history was meant to go beyond the chronical of history and seek the human spirit. Voltaire was the Nom De Plum of Francois-Marie Arouet a preeminent French writer, historian and philosopher who advocated for personal and religious freedoms. One of his most influential historical works is “Essay on the Customs and the Spirit of the Nations, published in 1756. Voltaire sought to write a universal history which gave supremacy to social history and arts and sciences rather than military campaigns.  Voltaire’s primary historical concern was with " the progress of the spirit." Although Voltaire saught to write an unbiased history he was critical of church histories and doctrines. Kelley says the he wrote history to further his own agenda. Voltaire sees the past as culmination in the perfection of the present.
     
This is the essay that I have written so far. I feel as though I have simply re-ordered and explained what Kelley has said. I am excited to do more research in other books. I want to include Ranke and Herder but I am concerned with overcomplication. 

Herder- Cultural history- Philosophy. Progress not perfection. Herder places people in the middle of the past and the present while
David Hume believed that human nature could be found through the study of history. He said that history provided “materials from which we may form our observations, and become acquainted with the regular springs of human action and behavior.” (Kelley, 236) He believed that history provided a more nuanced insight into human nature than critical philosophy.
Hagel
Ranke
Kant
