##Judeo-Christian Historiography

Judeo-Christian historiography began to take shape under the Roman rule of what was considered the Holy Land for both Jews and Christians; Jerusalem. It can be pinpointed to a Roman Jew who wrote of a universal history that was adopted by early Christian leaders to promote catholicity-that is universality. This universal history of humankind was governed by one God with a providential plan. History in the eyes of Jews and Christians was much more than random human actions; it was a narrative being written by the God of Abraham. More concisely described by Kelley, “For Christians and Jews alike history was not merely deeds done, and recorded, according to human ambitions and designs limited only by incalculable fortune and inscrutable fate; beyond this it was a progression of actions, an ordeal carried on within a providential plan” (Kelley, 75). In order to fully grasp this universal history presented by Judeo-Christianity, it’s important to begin with its Roman roots in Jerusalem.
  
The Jewish seed of Judeo-Christian historiography was planted by a man known as Josephus Flavius. He was born around 37 CE in Jerusalem to a priestly family. He was a well educated Jew that became a commander in the Great Revolt-that ultimately led to the destruction of the second Jewish temple in 70 CE. Josephus was taken as a Roman prisoner in 67 CE. When he was granted citizenship by Emperor Vespasian in 68 CE he began his first historical work the, Jewish War.
  
In his second major work, Jewish Antiquities, Josephus begins his development of a universal history. He begins with Creation in which all humankind have a common origin. According to Josephus humankind was all united in the belief of one God, one history, until the Tower of Babel found in the Biblical narrative. This narrative tells the story of how the whole world once spoke the same language but after angering God by trying to build a tower to the heavens, God confused their language and dispersed them throughout the world. Josephus believed that it was this moment that led to competing histories. Greeks and Romans who had forgotten this universal beginning created their own origin stories and thus their own history. As Kelley explains, “For the Jewish nation the ideal was associated not only with monotheism but also with an impulse to universalism, expressed historiographically in attempts, such as that of Josephus, to subsume the histories of other nations into the biblical account and chronology” (Kelley, 79). Josephus tried to create a common origin and universal history that was later adopted and expanded upon by early Christian historians.

Christian historiography also held to a common origin of humankind but they incorporated a turning point of history in which every event in the past led up to one essential event; the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus. Both the Jewish and Pagan past were fulfilled and given meaning through the Incarnation of God. According to Kelley: 
 
*Hebrew Scriptures were present at the birth of Christianity, as was the memory of a pagan past...that were to be cast off or fulfilled in the name of a new dispensation and, eventually, a new foundation and starting point for chronology. This ‘new song’...was the Word celebrated by St. John, which would replace...paganism (80)...the whole process of history was a ‘preparation for the Gospel,’ and it was in these terms that the Christian vision of history was formed by scholars, theologians, and preachers of the Word. It was in these terms, too, that the faces of Herodotus and Thucydides and their epigones made fitful appearances* (84). 

The goal of Christian historiography was to make sense of the past in light of the Gospels. In the minds of the Christians, God was the author of history who prepared the way for the moment he would become man. Therefore early Christian historians began to build a bridge between Paganism and Christianity. Jesus was the turning point in history in which believers would find the true meaning of the past. 
Eusebius built a bridge between Paganism and Christianity in his work of chronology. There is little known about Eusebius’ early life but it is believed that he was born around 275 CE. He became bishop of Caesarea, Palaestina around 313 CE and his work Ecclesiastical History remains important for understanding Christian historiography. Eusebius firmly believed that the past was a preparation for Jesus. The past was given meaning and was fulfilled by Jesus. Eusebius attempted to show this by presenting history as a continuum through successions. Eusebius used the succession of emperors and the philosophers of antiquity as well as apostolic succession in order to portray a universal history. He “...attempted to synchronize pagan and Judeo-Christian history through a wide range of sources, including the anti-Christian chronology of Porphyry, by aligning the Olympiadic system with regnal lists, the historians’ calculations, biblical genealogy beginning with Abraham, and historical information in the so-called spatium historicum between the columns” (Kelley 87). For Eusebius, the past testified to God’s providential plan and all that was needed from the historian was to write the chronicles that connected pagan past to Jesus, as the turning point of history. 

Augustine further explained history in light of the knowledge of Jesus. Augustine was born to a Christian mother and Pagan father on November 13, 354 in Tagaste, Numidia (Souk Ahras, Algeria). Augustine was well educated and became a teacher of rhetoric in Milan in 384 CE. Augustine was a pagan until a conversion experience led him to be baptized into Christianity in 387, and eventually he became the bishop of Hippo (Annaba, Algeria) in 395 CE. Augustine connected Paganism and Christianity in his belief that pagans lacked the knowledge of God working throughout history. “It was the one true God, not the Roman idols of Virtue, Victory, Faith, and Felicity-as Augustine argued and as history taught-that produced the success of the Roman state. And it was belief in this God that made wisdom possible: not understand in order that you might believe, but believe that you may understand” (Kelley, 91). Augustine’s most important work for his contribution to Christian historiography was the, City of God. Augustine wrote this in response to the fall of Rome and attempts to present history in dualistic terms. The city of man was symbolic of unbelief and the city of God was symbolic of faith. Within this work Augustine presents human history as predestined by God with Jesus being the revelation of truth and the Second Coming as being the end of humankind. Augustine presents a universal history in which a belief in this city of God provided a true understanding of the pagan past.

Judeo-Christian historiography presented a chronological, universal history with a providential plan. Judeo-Christian historians chose to bring biblical narratives to life within the history of humankind. They believed humans all have a common origin and as Josephus argued, humans separated after the Tower of Babel, and invented incorrect histories. Christian historians argued that the Hebrew Bible and the past of Greeks and Romans were fulfilled when God became man. Through Jesus humans could gain full knowledge of the past. Therefore history was a continuum in which everything was connected up to the present day of early Christian historians. Judeo-Christian historiography’s contribution of chronology and universality paved the way for future historiographies found in the Middle Ages up to the present day. 

